
dharma.  But, non-violence (ahinsã) is also considered to be dharma.  
Please clarify this.” 
 
69.4
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then explained, “Dharma involving violence is for the 
attainment  of dharma, arth,  and kãm.    Moreover,  the dharma which 
permits   violence   is   for   the   purpose   of   limiting   violence.      Non-
violence, on the other hand, is for the attainment of kalyãn – which is 
the dharma of  a sãdhu.   Dharma involving  violence  is  for  fulfilling 
worldly  desires,  but  it  is  not  for  the  attainment  of kalyãn,  whereas 
non-violence is solely for the purpose of attaining kalyãn.  

GADHADÃ I 
- 176 - 
69.5
 “Therefore, for both grahasthas and tyãgis only  non-violence  has 
been cited for the attainment of kalyãn.  For example, Uparichar-Vasu 
Rãjã  ruled  over  a  kingdom  and  still  followed  a  non-violent  lifestyle.  
Therefore,   a sãdhu should   not   bear   hatred   towards   anyone   by 
thought,   word,   or   deed.      Neither   should   he   keep   any   form   of 
aggression.  Instead, he should behave as a dãs of a dãs with all. 
 
69.6
 “In comparison, having an  aggressive  personality  is  the dharma of  a 
wicked  person,  and  behaving  in  a  calm  manner  is  the dharma of  a 
sãdhu.    Someone  may  then  ask, ‘How is it possible to maintain the 
characteristics  of  a  sãdhu,  while  trying  to  make  thousands  of  people 
follow   their niyams?’  Well,   the   reply   to   the   question   is   that 
Yudhishthir Rãjã reigned over a kingdom stretching for thousands of 
miles,   yet   he   managed   to   maintain   the   qualities of   a sãdhu.  
Conversely,  there  may  be  thousands  like  Bhimsen  who  intimidate 
others and are unable to change their ways despite being lectured.  In 
fact,  there  is  no  shortage  of  people  with  such  an  aggressive  nature; 
there  are  countless  such  people.    However,  to  be  a sãdhu,  is  indeed 
very difficult.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 69 || 69 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 70 
Saved From Death By The Prick Of A Thorn 
 
70.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on Chaitra sud 15  [29
th
 March,  1820], 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on  the  veranda 
outside  the  east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.  
He  had  tied  a  white  cloth  with  a  border  of  silken  thread  around  His 
head.    He  was  wearing  a white khes and  had covered  Himself  with  a 
white chãdar.  With His hand, He was turning a mãlã of tulsi beads.  A 
sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had 
gathered before Him. 
 

GADHADÃ I 
- 177 - 
70.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Senior paramhans,  please  ask  questions 
amongst  yourselves.    If  a grahastha has  a  question,  he  may  ask  the 
paramhans.” 
 
70.3
 Kãkã-Bhãi,  a bhakta from  the  village  of  Rojkã,  then  asked  Nityãnand 
Swãmi, “Deep within a person’s heart, something signals him to 
indulge in the vishays, while something else says ‘no’ and discourages 
him  from  indulging  in  them.    What  is  it  that  says ‘no’,  and  what  is  it 
that says ‘yes’?” 
 
70.4
 Nityãnand Swãmi replied, “It is the jeev that  says ‘no’,  and  it  is  the 
mind that says ‘yes’.” 
 
70.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Allow me to answer that question.  From 
the  very  day  we  began  to  understand  and  realise  who  our  parents 
were, they taught us: ‘This is your mother and this is your father; this is 
your  kãkã  and  this  is  your  brother;  this  is  your  mãmã  and  this  is  your 
sister; this is your mãmi and this is your kãki; this is your mãsi and this 
is  your  buffalo;  this  is  your  cow  and  this  is  your  horse;  these  are  your 
clothes  and  this  is  your  house;  this  is  your  mansion,  this  is  your  farm, 
and  this  is  your  jewellery’.  These  words  of kusangis have  been 
imprinted  in  the  mind.    How  are  they  imprinted?    Well,  it  is  like  the 
small  pieces  of  glass  that  women  attach  into  works  of  embroidery, 
where  the  mind  represents  the  embroidery,  and  the jeev represents 
the  piece  of  glass.    In  this  way,  the  words  and  the  sights  of  those 
kusangis,   along   with   the   other   types   of vishays,   have   become 
imprinted in the mind. 
 
70.6
 “Then, after the person enters satsang, the sant talks about the glory 
of Bhagvãn,  how  to  reject  the vishays,  and  also  explains  that  the 
world is  perishable.    In  this  way,  the  words  and  the sight  of  the sant 
dwell in the person’s mind.   
 
70.7
 “Take the example of two armies facing each other.  In the battlefield 
of Kurukshetra,  the  armies  of  the Kauravs and  the Pãndavs stood 
facing  each  other  and  fought  with  arrows,  spears,  and  various  other 

GADHADÃ I 
- 178 - 
types  of  weapons.    Some  fought  with  swords,  some  fought  with 
maces, and some fought with their bare hands.  In the process, some 
lost   their   heads,   others   injured   their   thighs,   and   many   were 
slaughtered.  Similarly, in the person’s antah-karans, there are forms 
of  the kusangis standing  armed  with  their  weapons  (five vishays).  
Opposite  them,  are  also  forms  of  the sant standing  armed  with 
weapons in the form of words such as, ‘Bhagvãn is satya, the world is 
perishable, and the vishays are false’.  Therefore,  a  mutual  conflict 
exists  between  these  two  sets  of  words.    When  the  force  of  the 
kusangis prevails, a desire to indulge in the vishays arises.  When the 
force   of   the sant prevails,   the   desire   to   indulge   in   the vishays 
disappears.    In  this  way,  there  is  a  conflict  within  the antah-karans.  
There is a shlok: 
 
yatra yogesh-varaha krushno yatra pãrtho dhanur-dharaha 
tatra shreer-vijayo bhootir-dhruva neetir-matir-mama 
 
“The meaning of this shlok is: Only  where  there  is  Yogeshvar,  Shree 
Krishna  Bhagvãn,  and  where  there  is  the  great  archer  Arjun,  there  is 
Lakshmi, victory,  divine  powers,  and  resolute  morality  exist’.  
Therefore,  a  person  should  have  the  firm  belief  that  victory  belongs 
to the person on whose side these sãdhus happen to be.” 
 
70.8
 Kãkã-Bhãi then asked further, “Mahãrãj, by what means can the force 
of a sant increase and the force of the kusangis decrease?” 
 
70.9
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The kusangis that  reside  internally  and 
externally,  are  both  one.    Also,  the sant residing  within  and  the sant 
residing  externally,  are  both  one.    The  force  of  the  internal kusangis 
increases  with  the  encouragement  of  the  external kusangis.    In  the 
same    way,    the   force   of    the sant within   increases    with    the 
encouragement   of   the sant residing   externally.      Therefore,   by 
avoiding   the   company  of   external kusangis,   and   by keeping   the 
company of only the sant residing externally, the force of the kusangis 
decreases  and  the  force  of  the sant increases.”  That is how Shreeji 
Mahãrãj answered that question. 

GADHADÃ I 
- 179 - 
70.10
 Again,   Kãkã-Bhãi  asked,  “Mahãrãj,  there  is  a  person  who  has 
overcome  the  fight  against kusangis,  and  for  whom  only  the  force  of 
the sant is  the  strongest.    There  is  another  person  whose  conflict  is 
still  on-going.    Of  the  two,  when  the  first  person  dies,  there  is  no 
doubt  that  he  will  attain  the dhãm of Bhagvãn.    But,  please  tell  us 
what  will  be  the  fate  of  the  second  person,  whose  conflict is  still on-
going, when he dies?” 
 
70.11
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “In a battle, one person may face Vãniyãs 
or someone from a weak social-caste.  As a result, he may easily win.  
Another  person  is  confronted  by  an  army  of  Arabs,  Rãjputs,  Kãthis, 
and  Kolis,  who  are  very  difficult  to  conquer, and  are  certainly  not  as 
easy  to  defeat  as  the  Vãniyãs.    Therefore,  his  fight  continues.    In  the 
process  of  such  fighting,  if  he  wins,  then  all  is  well and  good.    But,  if 
while  fighting  he  does  not  give  in  to  his  opponents,  despite  their 
attempts, and if he were to die at that time, would his master not be 
aware  of  his  courageous  efforts?    Would  He  not  appreciate  that, 
compared   to   the   person   who   faced   the   easy   opposition   of   the 
Vãniyãs, this person faced frightening opposition that was difficult to 
overcome?      The   master   would   indeed   be   well   aware   of   both 
situations.  In the same way, Bhagvãn is sure to help such a person as 
you  have  described.    He  will  believe, ‘This person is faced with the 
overwhelming  force of  fluctuating thoughts,  yet he  is  still  putting  up  a 
brave fight.  Therefore, he deserves to be congratulated’.  Realising 
this, Bhagvãn does help him.  For this reason, a person should remain 
carefree  and  not  worry  in  the  least.    He  should  continue  to  worship 
Bhagvãn in the same way, keep the sant the most important, and stay 
away from kusangis.”  Shreeji Mahãrãj replied joyfully in this way. 
 
70.12
 Jeevã-Bhãi,  from  the  village  Jaskã,  then  asked  Nityãnand  Swãmi, 
“How can we develop unfaltering nishchay in Bhagvãn?” 
 
70.13
 Nityãnand  Swãmi  replied,  “If  a  person  avoids  the  company  of 
kusangis and constantly keeps the company of sãdhus, then listening 
to   the   talks   of   those sãdhus   will   lead   to   the   development   of 

GADHADÃ I 
- 180 - 
unfaltering nishchay in Bhagvãn.    However,  if  he  keeps  the  company 
of kusangis, unfaltering nishchay will not develop.” 
 
70.14
 Again Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Allow me to answer that question.  A 
person  should  develop nishchay in Bhagvãn for  the sole  purpose  of 
the kalyãn of his jeev, but not out of a desire for some material object.  
For example, ‘If I practice satsang, my ill body will recover’, or ‘If I am 
childless, I will have a son’, or ‘If my sons are dying, they will live’, or ‘If 
I am poor, I will become rich’, or ‘If I practice satsang, I will regain my 
lost land’.  A person should not practice satsang while keeping desires 
for material possessions.  If a person does practice satsang with such 
desires, then he may become a very loyal satsangi if those desires are 
fulfilled.    However,  if  his  desires  are  not  fulfilled,  his nishchay will 
diminish.    Therefore,  a  person  should  practice satsang solely  for  the 
kalyãn of his jeev, and should not have any desire whatsoever for any 
material objects. 
 
70.15
 “Also, if there are ten members in a household and all ten are faced 
with death, then is it a small feat if even one is saved?  Or if a person 
was  destined  to  have  to  beg  for  food  but  received  a rotlo to  eat 
instead,  is  that  a  small  feat?    In  these  cases,  a  person  should  believe 
that  although  everything  was  going  to  be  lost,  at  least  this  much  has 
been saved!  In the same way, even if extreme misery is due to occur, 
that misery would certainly decrease slightly if a person were to keep 
the  refuge  of Bhagvãn.    However,  the jeev fails  to  understand  this.  
Also,  the  refuge  of Bhagvãn can  save  a  person  who  is  meant  to  be 
executed on a shuli with suffering a mere pinprick. 
 
70.16
 “There is a story that illustrates this:  Many thieves lived in a village.  
One of the thieves often kept the company of a sãdhu.  Then one day, 
while the thief was on his way to visit the sãdhu, a thorn pierced his 
foot.    As  a  result,  his  foot  became  swollen  and  he  was  unable  to 
accompany  the  other  thieves  in  a  robbery.    The  other  thieves,  who 
went to steal, broke into a king’s treasury and escaped with a great 
large   amount   of   money,   which   they   shared   among   themselves.  

GADHADÃ I 
- 181 - 
Naturally,  a  lot  of  money  came  their  way.    On  hearing  this  news,  the 
parents, wife, and relatives of the thief who used to sit with the sãdhu 
and  who  was  injured,  scolded  him:  ‘Because you went to the sãdhu 
instead  of  going  to  steal,  we  lost  out.    The  thieves  who  did  go  to  steal 
returned with lots of money’.  Meanwhile, the king’s army arrived, 
arrested  all  the  thieves,  and  took  them  away  to  be  executed  on  a 
shuli.    The  injured  thief  was  also  caught  and  sentenced  to  execution.  
However, all the villagers and the sãdhu stood witness and said, ‘This 
man was not involved in the theft as he had been hurt by a thorn’.  The 
thief was then released. 
 
70.17
 “In the same way, if a person who practices satsang were to face the 
suffering of being executed on a shuli, it would be reduced to the pain 
of  a  mere  thorn-pick.    After  all,  I  have  asked  Rãmãnand  Swãmi, ‘If 
your  satsangi  is  destined  to  suffer  the  distress  inflicted  by  the  sting  of 
one  scorpion,  may  the  distress  of  the  stings  of  millions  and  millions  of 
scorpions occur at each and every pore of my body, but no pain should 
distress  your  satsangi.    Also,  if  the begging  bowl  is  written  in  the 
prãrabdha of your satsangi, may that begging bowl come to me, but on 
no   account   should   your   satsangi   suffer   from   the   lack   of   food   or 
clothing.    Please  grant  me  these  two  vardãns’.  I   asked   this   of 
Rãmãnand  Swãmi,  and  he  happily  granted  it  to  me.    Therefore, 
destined   worldly   miseries,   do   not   fall   upon   a  person   practicing 
satsang.   
 
70.18
 “So, if a person practices satsang with desires for temporary material 
objects,  then  doubts  will  certainly  cloud  his nishchay.    Therefore, 
other than the desire for the kalyãn of his own jeev, a person should 
practice satsang having   no   desire   whatsoever.      Only   then   will 
unfaltering nishchay develop.”  
 
70.19
 This   is   only   a   portion   of   the   detailed   talk   delivered   by   Shreeji 
Mahãrãj.   
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 70 || 70 || 

GADHADÃ I 
- 182 - 
Gadhadã I – 71 
Bhagvãn Incarnates With His Akshardhãm 
 
71.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on  the  evening  of Chaitra  vad 4  [2
nd
 April, 
1820], Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was sitting  with  a  large,  cylindrical  pillow  on 
a decorated bedstead which had been placed on the platform in front 
of the west-facing medi in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was 
wearing  a  white khes and  had  covered  Himself  with  a  white chãdar.  
He had also tied a white feto around His head.  A sabhã of sãdhus, as 
well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered  before  Him.  
Muktãnand  Swãmi  and  some sãdhus were  singing kirtans to  the 
accompaniment of musical instruments. 
 
71.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Please conclude the kirtans for now, and 
begin a question-answer discussion amongst yourselves.” 
 
71.3
  Somlã Khãchar then asked, “Bhagvãn forgives all the mistakes of His 
bhaktas, but which one mistake does He not forgive?” 
 
71.4
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Bhagvãn forgives all other mistakes, but He 
does   not   forgive   the   mistake   of   insulting   a bhakta of Bhagvãn.  
Therefore,  a  person  should  never  harm  a bhakta of Bhagvãn in  any 
way  whatsoever.    Furthermore,  of  all  the  mistakes  made  against 
Bhagvãn, to deny the svarup of Bhagvãn is a very serious mistake.  A 
person should never make this mistake; and anyone who does make 
this mistake, commits a sin more serious than the five great sins. 
 
71.5
 “Denying the svarup of Bhagvãn is nothing more than understanding 
Bhagvãn, who eternally is sãkãr, to be nirãkãr.  In fact, Bhagvãn who 
is Purushottam,    forever    resides    with    a divya    svarup in    His 
Akshardhãm,  and  His  divine  light  is  like that  of  millions  of  suns  and 
moons.    Countless  millions  of brahm-rup muktas  serve  the  holy  feet 
of    that Bhagvãn.        That Bhagvãn,    also    known    as Parbrahm 
Purushottam, incarnates on earth out of compassion, for the kalyãn of 
the jeevs.    When  He  incarnates,  all tattvas that  He  accepts  become 

GADHADÃ I 
- 183 - 
brahm.    The  three  bodies  (sthul, sukshma,  and kãran),  the  three 
mental states (jãgrat, svapna, and sushupti), the ten indriyas, and the 
five prãns,  were  all  apparent  in avatãrs such  as Rãm and Krishna.  
Although  all  of  them appear  to  be  like  ordinary  humans,  in  reality 
they are all brahm, not mãyik.  Therefore, a person should never deny 
the svarup of Bhagvãn.” 
 
71.6
 Mãtra Dhãdhal then asked, “What is the characteristic of jealousy?” 
 
71.7
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A person who is jealous of someone cannot 
tolerate  that  person  benefiting  in  any  way.    He  would  be  pleased  if 
misery falls upon that person.  That is the characteristic of jealousy.” 
 
71.8
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  the munis, “A person who has nishchay 
in  the pratyaksha murti of Bhagvãn,  worships Bhagvãn,  and  behaves 
in  accordance  with  the niyams of satsang,  will  attain kalyãn.    That  is 
the  way  of satsang.    However,  what  are  the  methods  of kalyãn 
according to the shãstras?  The meanings of the Veds are indeed very 
difficult to understand, so they are not narrated in kathãs.  However, 
the   Shreemad   Bhãgvat   Purãn   and   the   Mahãbhãrat   contain   the 
message  of  the  Veds,  and  are  easier  to  understand.    Therefore,  they 
are widely narrated in public kathã.  Please explain how a person can 
attain kalyãn as  explained  in  the shãstras.    Also,  bear  in  mind  that 
Shankar-Ãchãrya  has  proposed  that Bhagvãn is nirãkãr,  whereas 
Rãmãnuj-Ãchãrya and other ãchãryas have proposed that Bhagvãn is 
sãkãr.    Therefore,  please  base  your  answer  on  the  principles  of  the 
shãstras.” 
 
71.9
 Using  references  from shãstras,  the munis then  disproved  the  view 
that Bhagvãn is nirãkãr,  and  promoted  the  view  that kalyãn is  only 
possible by the worship of Bhagvãn with a sãkãr murti. 
 
71.10
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then commented, “I myself also accept that view, but 
I  would  like  to  ask  you  a  question  regarding  this.   Purushottam 

GADHADÃ I 
- 184 - 
Bhagvãn is   greater   than   the nirãkãr Akshar-Brahm and   He   is 
eternally  sãkãr.    If  a  person,  who  has  found  that Bhagvãn on  this 
earth, still cherishes a desire to see Brahmpur, Golok, Vaikunth, Shvet-
Dvip,  and  the  other dhãms of Bhagvãn,  can  he  be  said  to  have 
nishchay in Bhagvãn, or not?” 
 
71.11
 The munis replied, “Despite having found Bhagvãn,  a  person  who 
constantly  feels  in  his  mind, ‘Only when I see Akshardhãm and other 
dhãms,  or  see  the  light  of  millions  and  millions  of  suns,  is  my  kalyãn 
attained,’ does not have absolute nishchay.” 
 
71.12
 Shreeji Mahãrãj argued this by asking, “What sin has he committed in 
having  a  desire  to  see Brahmpur,  the  other dhãms and  the svarup of 
brahm, that you disqualify his nishchay?” 
 
71.13
 The munis replied, “Why should a person who believes that kalyãn is 
attained  by  the  mere darshan of pratyaksha  Bhagvãn have  a  dislike 
for Brahmpur, Golok,  and  other dhãms?    After  all,  they  do  belong  to 
Bhagvãn.  Also, without Bhagvãn, he would have no desire for them.” 
 
71.14
 Shreeji Mahãrãj further questioned, “Those dhãms and  the pãrshads 
residing in them, are chaitanya and are beyond Mãyã.  So, what flaw 
is  there  in  them  that  a  person  should  not  desire  to  see  them?    Also, 
what  about Bhagvãn who  is pratyaksha on  this  earth?    How  do  you 
view His pãrshads, who are in fact perishable, and the houses He lives 
in, which can be destroyed?” 
 
71.15
 The munis replied, “We understand those houses to be like Brahmpur 
and   the   other dhãms,   and   we   understand   those pãrshads to   be 
brahm-rup.” 
 
71.16
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Brahmpur and  the pãrshads of Bhagvãn 
residing  in Brahmpur are  immortal  and  imperishable,  whereas  the 
houses and pãrshads of this Mrutyu-Lok are perishable.  How can you 
possibly compare the two?” 

GADHADÃ I 
- 185 - 
71.17
 Finally,  Nityãnand  Swãmi  requested,  “Mahãrãj,  you  will  have  to 
answer that question.” 
 
71.18
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  explained,  “When Bhagvãn incarnates   for   the 
purpose of granting kalyãn to the jeevs, He is always accompanied by 
His Akshardhãm,  His pãrshads – who  are chaitanya – and  all  of  His 
divine   powers.      However,   they   are   not   perceived   by   others.  
Nevertheless,   when   a bhakta acquires   an alokik vision   during 
samãdhi,  he  does  see  divine  light  equivalent  to  countless  millions  of 
suns  in  the murti of Bhagvãn.    Together  with  the murti,  he  also  sees 
countless millions of muktas, and also Akshardhãm itself.  Therefore, 
all of these do accompany Bhagvãn.  Despite all of this, Bhagvãn only 
accepts  the sevã of  His own,  earthly bhaktas.    He stays in  the  houses 
of  His bhaktas,  which  are  made  of  mud,  clay,  and  stone.    He  lovingly 
accepts  whatever  those bhaktas offer  Him,  whether  it  is  incense,  an 
oil lamp, food, clothes, or anything else.  He does so for the purpose of 
elevating  those  earthly pãrshads to  the  ranks  of divya pãrshads.    All 
the  objects  that  a bhakta offers  to Bhagvãn assume  a divya form  in 
the dhãm of Bhagvãn.    Moreover,  that bhakta also  attains  a divya 
svarup and  attains  those divya objects  there.    In  this  way, Bhagvãn 
accepts  all  the  offerings  offered  by  His  earthly bhaktas in  order  to 
allow  them  to  experience  everlasting  bliss.    Therefore,  a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn should  realise  that  the svarup of Bhagvãn,  along  with  His 
Akshardhãm, is present on this earth, and he should also explain this 
fact to others.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 71 || 71 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 72 
Nishchay Coupled With The Knowledge Of Bhagvãn’s Greatness 
 
72.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on Chaitra  vad 11  [9
th
 April,  1820],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  facing  east  on  a  decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  north-facing  rooms  near  the 

GADHADÃ I 
- 186 - 
mandir of Shree   Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in  Dãdã  Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Gadhadã.  He was dressed entirely in white clothes.  A sabhã of munis, 
as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
72.2
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi said, “Mahãrãj, yesterday you had a very 
nice  talk  with  Dãdã  Khãchar.    All  of  us  very  much  wish  to  hear  that 
talk.” 
 
72.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If a bhakta of Bhagvãn has nishchay in 
Bhagvãn coupled  with  the  knowledge  of  His  greatness,  and  also 
thoroughly  realises  the  greatness  of  the sãdhus  and satsangis,  then 
even  if  that bhakta’s karmas  and kãl happen  to  be  unpleasant,  both 
kãl and karma combined  are  incapable  of  harming  him  due  to  the 
extreme  force  of  his bhakti.    On  the  other  hand,  a  person  lacking 
nishchay in Bhagvãn and His sant, does not benefit in any way, even if 
Bhagvãn wishes to do good for that person. 
 
72.4
 “A person who suppresses the humble, does not benefit in any way 
either.  In  fact,  Bhishma-Pitã  has  said  to  Yudhishthir  Rãjã  in  the 
Mahãbhãrat, ‘If you suppress the humble, you and your descendants 
will be burnt to ashes’.  Therefore, whether he is a bhakta of Bhagvãn 
or not, no humble person should even slightly be pained.  Moreover, 
if a person does hurt the humble, not only does he not benefit in any 
way,  but  he  also  incurs  a  sin  equivalent  to  the  sin  of  killing  a 
brãhman. 
 
72.5
 “In the same way, the sin incurred by making false allegations against 
someone   is   also   equivalent to   killing   a brãhman.      Even   if   the 
allegations  happen  to  be  true,  a  person  should  constructively  advise 
the person in private, but in no way should he be publicly humiliated. 
 
72.6
 “Similarly, a person who forces the five categories of women to lapse 
in  their dharma,  also  incurs  the  sin  of  killing  a brãhman.    What  are 
these  five categories  of  women?    First,  a  woman  who  has  sought  a 
person’s refuge; second, a person’s own wife who does not desire 
intimacy on days of vrat or on day of fasting; third, a woman who is a 

GADHADÃ I 
- 187 - 
pati-vratã wife;  fourth,  a  widow;  and  fifth,  a  women  who  has  placed 
her  trust  in  a  person.    If  a  person  commits  adultery  with  these  five 
categories of women, he incurs the sin of killing a brãhman.  Of these 
five categories, if a widow’s mind wavers  towards  immorality,  she 
should be inspired to follow dharma.” 
 
72.7
 The munis began  to  sing rasik kirtans of Bhagvãn.    Hearing  them, 
Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “When Bhagvãn assumes a body for the sake of 
the kalyãn of the jeevs, all of His actions are like those of humans.  On 
seeing  those  actions,  a bhakta of Bhagvãn understands  them  to  be 
charitras,  whereas  a vimukh or  a  weak-minded bhakta perceives 
avgun.    For  example,  when  Shukji  narrated  the rãs-leelã,  Parikshit 
Rãjã had a doubt, and so asked, ‘Bhagvãn had incarnated to establish 
the order of dharma.  Then, why did he commit a breach of dharma by 
associating with the wives of others?’  In this way, Parikshit perceived 
avgun in Bhagvãn. 
 
72.8
 Shukji,  on  the  other  hand,  thoughtfully  began  singing  praises  of 
Bhagvãn,  explaining  that Kãm-Dev has  conquered Brahmã and  other 
devs and  brought  them  under  his  control.    This  has  greatly  inflated 
Kãm-Dev’s arrogance.        To    vanquish    that    arrogance, Bhagvãn 
challenged Kãm-Dev.  Just as a powerful king gives his own weapons 
to  his  enemy  prior  to  fighting  him, Bhagvãn also  gave  his  enemy 
(Kãm-Dev), the necessary ‘ammunition’ for fighting.  What was that 
‘ammunition’?  Well, the force of Kãm-Dev is revealed in the company 
of  women,  and  that  force  is  also  greater  during  the  nights  of  the 
monsoon season.  In addition, romantic gestures of women, listening 
to   seductive   words,   seeing   the   beauty   of   women,   and   touching 
women, greatly increase the force of Kãm-Dev.  After giving all of this 
as ‘ammunition’ to Kãm-Dev, Shree Krishna Bhagvãn conquered Kãm-
Dev and continuously remained an urdhva-retã like a brahm-chãri.  In 
this   way,   he   vanquished Kãm-Dev’s arrogance.      No   one   except 
Bhagvãn possesses  such  magnificent  powers.    It  was  after  realising 
this  immense  power  of Bhagvãn that  Shukji  celebrated  the charitras 

GADHADÃ I 
- 188 - 
of Bhagvãn.  However, as Parikshit Rãjã failed to understand this, he 
perceived an avgun in Bhagvãn. 
 
72.9
 “However, someone may ask you, ‘Being paramhans, why do you sing 
such rasik kirtans?’  In that case, you should tell that person, ‘If we do 
not sing rasik kirtans, and instead perceive avgun in the rasik charitras 
of  Bhagvãn,  then  we  would  also  join  the  ranks  of  Parikshit  Rãjã  and 
other  nãstik  vimukhs.    However,  we  do  not  wish  to  join  the ranks  of 
vimukhs.    After  all, Shukji,  who  is  considered  to  be  the  guru  of  all 
paramhans,   himself   celebrated   the   rasik   charitras   of   Bhagvãn.  
Therefore, we must also certainly do the same’. 
 
72.10
 “Nevertheless, when Purushottam Bhagvãn, who is greater than both 
the  perishable  and  the  imperishable,  assumes  a  human svarup and 
travels  in  the brahmãnd for  the kalyãn of  the jeevs,  His charitras are 
just like those of all humans.  Just as humans possess mãyik svabhãvs 
such  as kãm, krodh, lobh, moh, mad,  matsar, irshyã, ãshã, trushnã, 
abhimãn,  defeat,  victory,  fear,  and  grief, Bhagvãn also  exhibits  the 
same svabhãvs  Himself.    However,  they  are  all  for  the kalyãn of  the 
jeevs.    So,  a  true bhakta celebrates  the charitras of Bhagvãn and 
attains Akshardhãm, whereas a vimukh perceives avgun in them. 
 
72.11
 “In fact, just as Bhagvãn is  the ãtmã of  the  perishable,  He  is  also  the 
ãtmã of Akshar-Brahm,  who  is  greater  than Prakruti and Purush.  
With His own powers, Bhagvãn supports both the perishable and the 
imperishable,    yet    He    Himself    is    distinct    from    them    both.  
Furthermore, the greatness of Bhagvãn is such that within the pore of 
His  each  and  every  hair,  countless  millions  of brahmãnds appear  as 
mere  atoms.    Only  when that  great Bhagvãn becomes  like  a  human 
for the sake of the kalyãn of the jeevs, do they have an opportunity to 
do  His sevã.    If  He  were  to  remain  exactly  the same  size  as  He  really 
is, then even the ruling devs of this brahmãnd, like Brahmã, would be 
incapable of having His darshan and performing His sevã.  Then, what 
can be said of mere humans? 

GADHADÃ I 
- 189 - 
72.12
 “Consider  the vadvãnal fire   that   dwells   in   the   ocean.      Despite 
consuming the waters of the ocean, it is so vast that even the water of 
the  ocean  cannot  extinguish  it.    If  we  wished  to  light  an  oil  lamp  in 
our homes and that vadvãnal fire were to enter our homes, instead of 
enjoying the light of the oil lamp, we would all be burnt and reduced 
to ashes.  However, if that same fire were to assume the form of an oil 
lamp, its light would provide joy, even though the oil lamp is the very 
same fire.  The oil lamp is so weak that it could be easily extinguished 
by  blowing  on  it  or smothering it  by  hand.    Nevertheless,  only it  can 
provide comfort to us, whereas the vadvãnal fire cannot. 
 
72.13
 “In the same way, Bhagvãn may  appear  to  be  as  powerless  as  a 
human,   but   only   through   that svarup can   countless jeevs attain 
kalyãn.    The jeevs are  incapable  of  even  doing darshan of  His murti, 
within  who’s  each  and  every  hair  reside   countless   millions   of 
brahmãnds.      This   makes kalyãn impossible   through   that murti.  
Therefore,  all charitras Bhagvãn performs  after  assuming  a  human 
murti are  worthy  of  being  celebrated.    A  person  should  not  doubt, 
‘Despite being Bhagvãn, why does He do this?’  In fact, to realise all of 
Bhagvãn’s charitras as kalyãn-kãri,  is  the  very dharma of  a bhakta.  
Only a person who understands this can be called a perfect bhakta of 
Bhagvãn.” 
 
72.14
 Kãkã-Bhãi,  of  the  village  Rojkã,  then  asked,  “What  are  the 
characteristics  of  a  person  who  merely  has nishchay in Bhagvãn, 
without realising His greatness?  Also, what are the characteristics of 
person  who  has nishchay in Bhagvãn coupled  with the  knowledge  of 
His greatness?” 
 
72.15
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A person with only nishchay still  has  the 
doubt, ‘Although I have attained Bhagvãn, will I attain kalyãn or not?’  
On   the   other   hand,   a   person   with nishchay coupled   with   the 
knowledge  of Bhagvãn’s greatness  believes, ‘From the very  day  I  had 
the  darshan  of  Bhagvãn,  my  kalyãn  has  been  guaranteed.    In  fact, 

GADHADÃ I 
- 190 - 
kalyãn  is  also  assured  to  anyone  who  devoutly  has  my  darshan  or 
accepts  my  advice.    Then,  how  can  there  be  any  doubt  regarding  my 
own kalyãn?  I am indeed absolutely fulfilled.  Furthermore, whichever 
spiritual activity I do perform, I perform solely to please Bhagvãn’.  A 
person  with  such  understanding  should  be  known  to  have nishchay 
in Bhagvãn coupled with the knowledge of His greatness.” 
 
72.16
 Again,  Kãkã-Bhãi asked, “What are the  characteristics  of  the  three 
types of bhaktas of Bhagvãn –uttam, madhyam, and kanishth?” 
 
72.17
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The uttam bhakta believes himself to be the 
ãtmã, and distinct from his body.  He does not associate the qualities 
of  the  body  (jad,  full  of  misery,  perishable,  impure)  with  the ãtmã, 
and  nor  does  he  associate  the  qualities  of  the ãtmã (achhedhya, 
abhedhya, avinãshi)  with the  body.    He  sees  the jeevãtmã residing  in 
his  body,  as  well  as  the Paramãtmã dwelling  within  his ãtmã.    Not 
only  that,  he  sees  the ãtmãs residing  in  the  bodies  of  the  others  as 
well.   Despite having  become  so skilled,  he  realises Bhagvãn and  His 
sant to  be  superior  to ãtmã-nishthã,  and  does  not  have  even  the 
slightest pride in the fact that he has attained ãtmã-nishthã.  A person 
with such characteristics is said to be an uttam bhakta. 
 
72.18
 “In  comparison,  a  person  who  becomes  jealous  of bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn,  despite  having  knowledge  of  the ãtmã and nishchay in 
Bhagvãn,  should  be  considered  to  be madhyam bhakta.    If Bhagvãn 
were  to  insult  this  person,  he  develops  jealousy  towards Bhagvãn, 
and feels, ‘Even though Bhagvãn is so great, why is He treating me this 
way, despite no fault of my own?’  
 
72.19
 “Finally, a person who has nishchay in Bhagvãn but no ãtmã-nishthã, 
has  love  for Bhagvãn as  well  as  for  the  affairs  of  this  world,  and 
experiences  joy  and  grief  in  the  affairs  of  this  world,  should  be 
considered to be a kanishth bhakta.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 72 || 72 || 

GADHADÃ I 
- 191 - 
Gadhadã I – 73 
Conquering Lust 
The World’s Greatest Brahm-Chãri 
 
73.1
 In the Samvat year 1876, on the night of Chaitra vad Amãs [12
th
 April, 
1820], Swãmi Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on the veranda 
outside  the  north-facing room of His residence in Dãdã Khãchar’s 
darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  wearing  a  white khes and  had  covered 
Himself with a white chãdar.  He had also tied a white feto around His 
head.    At  that  time,  four  senior sãdhus,  including  Muktãnand  Swãmi, 
and some fifty other haribhaktas, had gathered before Him. 
 
73.2
 Then, Gopãlãnand Swãmi asked, “What is the nature of lust?” 
 
73.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “Semen alone is the nature of lust.” 
 
73.4
 Gopãlãnand Swãmi then raised a doubt, “Semen is one of the seven 
basic  constituents  of  the  body – the  seven  basic  constituents  of  the 
body  are: ras  (bodily  fluids),  rakta  (blood),  mãns  (muscle),  med  (fat), 
asthi  (bones),  majjã  (marrow),  and  shukra  (semen).    Then,  how  can 
semen  alone  be  called  the  nature  of  lust?    Also,  how  exactly  is  that 
semen produced?” 
 
73.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “The mind resides in the mano-vahã nãdi.  
Whenever  a  thought  related  to  women  arises  in  the  mind,  semen  is 
churned from the body, and after collecting in the mano-vahã nãdi, it 
is  discharged  through  the  genitals – just  as ghee surfaces  from 
yoghurt when it is churned by a churning rod.  A person whose semen 
is  not  discharged  through  the  genitals  is  known  as  an urdhva-retã 
and  a  perfect brahm-chãri.    When Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn associated 
with  the gopis during  the rãs-leelã,  he did not  allow  the  discharge of 
semen.    For  this  reason,  he  was  known  as  an urdhva-retã brahm-
chãri,  and  had  therefore  conquered  lust.    Therefore,  semen  alone  is 
the   nature   of   lust.      A   person   who   has   conquered   semen,   has 
conquered lust.” 

GADHADÃ I 
- 192 - 
73.6
 Gopãlãnand Swãmi asked again, “When the body is burnt after death, 
its  seven  constituents  are  burnt  along  with  it.    Therefore,  if  semen 
alone  is  the  nature  of  lust,  then  by  the  burning  of  semen  along  with 
the  body,  lust should  also  be  burnt.    Why  then,  does  lust  arise  when 
the jeev enters another body?” 
 
73.7
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Semen is retained in the sukshma body.  
Moreover,  it  is  because  of  the sukshma body  that  the sthul body  is 
produced.    When  a  ghost,  which  is  mainly  composed  of  a sukshma 
body, enters into the sthul body of another man and associates with a 
woman,  that  woman  conceives  a  child  by  that  ghost.    Therefore, 
semen is definitely retained in the sukshma body.” 
 
73.8
 Gopãlãnand Swãmi questioned further, “Shivji was  an urdhva-retã, 
yet  on  seeing Mohini,  semen  was  discharged.    This  implies  that  as 
long  as  there  is  semen  in  the  body,  it  is  sure  to  be  discharged 
whenever  a  man  associates  with  a  woman  in  the jãgrat state  or 
svapna state.  So then, as long as there is semen in the body, how can 
a person be called a perfect brahm-chãri?” 
 
73.9
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “That can be said to be a fault in Shivji’s 
yogic powers.    A  person  whose  semen  is  discharged  in  the jãgrat 
state  or svapna state  by  the  thought  of  a  woman,  cannot  be  called  a 
true brahm-chãri.    That  is  why  in  this  whole  world, Nar-Nãrãyan 
Rushi is  the  only  one  who  has  firm brahm-chãrya.    Since  we  have 
accepted  the  refuge  of  that Nar-Nãrãyan Rushi,  by  his  grace  and  by 
worshipping   him,   we   shall   also   gradually   become nishkãmi and 
perfect brahm-chãris like Him. 
 
73.10
 “Yogis try  to  burn  the  semen,  which  remains  in  the  body,  with  great 
effort.    However, Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn maintained  perfect brahm-
chãrya, even in the midst of the company of women.  Such powers are 
only   present   in Bhagvãn.      No   one else  is  capable   of   remaining 
uninfluenced  in  this  way.    Therefore,  other yogis should  make  an 

GADHADÃ I 
- 193 - 
effort  to  avoid  thinking  of  women  in  both  the jãgrat state  and  the 
svapna state.” 
 
73.11
 Shuk  Muni  then  asked,  “In  Dvãrikã, Shree   Krishna Bhagvãn had 
16,108  wives.    It  is  said  that  He  had  ten  sons  and  one  daughter  by 
each wife.  How should one understand this?” 
 
73.12
 Shreeji Mahãrãj clarified, “The incidents of Dvãrikã are one thing, and 
then incidents of Vraj are another.  In Dvãrikã, Shree Krishna Bhagvãn 
had  adopted  the  philosophy  of  Sãnkhya.    A  follower  of  the  Sãnkhya 
philosophy  believes  his  own  self  to  be  distinct  from  the  mind,  body, 
and indriyas.    While  performing  all  actions,  he  does  not  regard 
himself  as  being  the  doer  of  those  actions,  nor  does  he  experience 
either joy or grief from those actions.  That was the principle adopted 
by Shree    Krishna Bhagvãn.        Therefore,    He    was    said    to    be 
uninfluenced.    The  Sãnkhya  philosophy  adopted  by Shree  Krishna 
Bhagvãn in Dvãrikã is the very same Sãnkhya philosophy followed by 
kings such as Janak, who worshipped Bhagvãn as grahasthas.  In the 
same  way, Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn was  also  a grahastha,  and  was 
known  as  the  king  of  Dvãrikã.    Therefore,  because  He  followed  the 
Sãnkhya philosophy, he remained uninfluenced as well. 
 
73.13
 “However, in Vrundãvan Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn had  adopted  the 
philosophy   of Yog,   by  which   He  maintained   His   vow  of   perfect 
brahm-chãrya,  despite  associating  with  women.    At  that  time,  He 
displayed  the  powers  of Nar-Nãrãyan Rushi within  Himself.    In  the 
Shreemad  Bhãgvat, Kapil-Dev explains  to  Devhuti, ‘No one, except 
Nar-Nãrãyan  Rushi,  is  capable  of  overcoming  my  mãyã  in  the  form  of 
women’.  However, Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn conquered  lust  while 
associating with women. 
 
73.14
 “Now, consider the following incident: When Durvãsã Rushi came 
and Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn began  sending  all  the gopis with  dishes 

GADHADÃ I 
- 194 - 
filled  with  food  for  him,  the gopis asked, ‘How shall we cross the 
Yamunãji River?’ 
 
73.15
 “At that time, Shree Krishna Bhagvãn said, ‘Tell Yamunãji that if Shree 
Krishna  is  forever  a  brahm-chãri, then make way for us’.  When  the 
gopis said this to Yamunãji, she made way for them. 
 
73.16
 “After feeding Durvãsã Rushi, all the gopis asked him, ‘Yamunãji is in 
our way.  How shall we return home?’ 
 
73.17
 “Durvãsã Rushi then asked, ‘How did you come?’ 
 
73.18
 “The gopis explained, ‘We told Yamunãji  that  if  Shree Krishna  is 
forever a brahm-chãri, then make way for us.  So she made way for us.  
But how shall we return home now?’ 
 
73.19
 “Durvãsã  Rushi  then  said, ‘Tell Yamunãji that if Durvãsã Rushi is 
forever fasting, then make way for us’.  When  the gopis said  this  to 
Yamunãji,  she  made  way  for  them.    Seeing  this,  the gopis were 
extremely  surprised.    However,  they  were  unable  to  realise  the 
greatness of Shree Krishna Bhagvãn or Durvãsã Rushi. 
 
73.20
 “Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn played  with  the gopis while  maintaining  His 
vow  of  perfect brahm-chãrya and  was  therefore  still  a brahm-chãri.  
Durvãsã  Rushi also  united  his ãtmã with Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn,  the 
ãtmã of  all,  and  although  he  ate  all  the  food  offered  by  the gopis,  he 
was  still  forever  fasting.    This  was  because  in  reality,  he  had  fed  all 
the  food  to Bhagvãn.    Therefore,  the  actions  of  the  extremely  great 
cannot be understood. 
 
73.21
 “If a person looks for followers of the Sãnkhya philosophy, he could 
find  thousands.    However,  to  be  an urdhva-retã by  way  of yogic 
powers,  is  only  possible  for Nar-Nãrãyan.    In  addition,  a  true bhakta 
of Nar-Nãrãyan can also gradually develop firm brahm-chãrya by the 
power of his worship, but others cannot. 

GADHADÃ I 
- 195 - 
73.22
 “Furthermore, if semen is discharged through the genitals in the 
jãgrat state or svapna state, a person cannot be called a brahm-chãri.  
Nevertheless, a person who follows the eight types of tyãg of women 
is walking on the path of brahm-chãrya.  So with time, by the grace of 
Nar-Nãrãyan, he will gradually become a firm brahm-chãri. 
 
73.23
 “When I was young, I had heard that semen is also released through a 
person’s sweat.  So in order to retain my semen, I learnt two types of 
jal-basti,  and  also kunjar-kriyã.    In  order  to  conquer  lust,  I  learnt 
many yogic ãsans as well.  When I slept at night, I slept in the posture 
of gorakh-ãsan to prevent the discharge of semen even in the svapna 
state.    To  conquer  lust,  I  made  such  an  effort  that  my  body  stopped 
sweating, and I no longer felt either the cold or the heat.  Then, when 
I  came  to  Rãmãnand  Swãmi,  he  tried  to  make  me  sweat  by  pasting 
ãval leaves  all  over  my  body.    Even  then,  my  body  would  not  sweat.  
Therefore,   conquering   lust   is   the   most   difficult   of   all   spiritual 
activities.  However, a person who has the firm strength of upãsanã of 
Bhagvãn’s svarup,  has  become  absolutely  free  from  desires  for  the 
five vishays, and is firm in remaining free of worldly desires, becomes 
free of lust by the grace of Bhagvãn.” 
 
73.24
 Nityãnand Swãmi then asked, “What is the method of becoming free 
of worldly desires?  Is it listening to talks, or is it vairãgya?” 
 
73.25
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Vairãgya alone  cannot  last; it  is  eventually 
destroyed.    Therefore,  after  developing  knowledge  of  the ãtmã and 
complete gnãn of Bhagvãn’s svarup,  a  person  should  think, ‘I am the 
ãtmã and sachidãnand, whereas the body and the brahmãnd are mãyik 
and perishable.  How can they compare to me?  Moreover, my ishta-dev 
is  Purushottam  Bhagvãn,  who  is  greater  than  even  Akshar,  and  is  the 
supporter of countless millions of brahmãnds.  I have the firm refuge of 
that Bhagvãn’.  Vairãgya developed from these thoughts, is said to be 
coupled  with gnãn.    It  is  this vairãgya that  is  never  destroyed.    For 
example, a burning flame is extinguished when water is poured over 
it.    However,  the vadvãnal fire,  which  rests  in  the  ocean,  cannot  be 

GADHADÃ I 
- 196 - 
extinguished   even   by   the   waters   of   the   ocean   itself.      Similarly, 
vairãgya coupled  with gnãn is  like  the vadvãnal fire  and  the  fire  of 
lightning – it cannot be extinguished.  Without that gnãn, other forms 
of vairãgya cannot be trusted. 
 
73.26
 “My vairãgya is like that of the fire of lightning and the vadvãnal fire.  
This  nature  of  mine  is  known  by  those  who  have  stayed  extremely 
close  to me.    However,  those  who  remain  far  from me,  are  unable  to 
realise my nature.  Furthermore, this Mulji Brahm-Chãri may appear 
to  be  naïve,  yet  he  thoroughly  knows  my  nature,  and  understands, 
‘Mahãrãj is as distant as ãkãsh.  He has no prejudices against or in 
favour of anyone’.  Also,  because  he  knows  my  nature,  he  possesses 
qualities  like  those  of Bhagvãn.    Moreover,  the antaryãmi Bhagvãn 
residing  within  all,  explains  to  the  minds  of  all  men  and  women, 
‘There is no fault whatsoever in this Brahm-Chari’. 
 
73.27
 “The means of acquiring such great qualities is as follows:  Whoever 
believes  a  great sant to  be  absolutely  free  of  flaws  becomes  totally 
flawless himself.  However, if a person perceives flaws in a great sant, 
that person’s intellect becomes polluted, and inner enemies, like kãm 
and krodh, all come to dwell within his heart.  As a result, the heart of 
that person who perceives faults in the sat-purush is greatly troubled 
by  disturbing  thoughts.    Although  he  may  practice satsang,  he  never 
stops being unhappy. 
 
73.28
 “Those who are wise, realise all my characteristics by staying close to 
me.  They realise, ‘Mahãrãj has no affection for any object in this world 
that  can  awaken infatuation,  such  as  wealth,  women,  jewellery,  food, 
and drink.  In fact, Mahãrãj remains distant from all these things.  Also, 
when  He  allows  someone  to  sit  near  Him  or  talks  to  him  of  gnãn,  it  is 
purely out of compassion for the kalyãn of the jeev’.  On the other hand, 
those   who   are   fools,   whether   they   stay   near   or   far,   cannot 
understand my nature. 
73.29
 “These talks can only be understood by a person who has ãtmã-
nishthã, who offers bhakti to Bhagvãn while holding His murti within 

GADHADÃ I 
- 197 - 
the ãtmã,  and  who  does  not  abandon  the  worship  of Bhagvãn even 
after becoming brahm-rup.  Therefore, after developing ãtmã-nishthã 
and  understanding  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn’s murti,  no  desire  for 
any  objects  remains.    Once  worldly  desires  are  eradicated,  a  person 
may  experience  pain  and pleasure  according  to  the prãrabdha of  his 
body, but the indriyas no longer remain sharp. 
 
73.30
 “The indriyas are  the  jagged  edges  of  the manomay chakra.    They 
become  blunt  only  by  the  complete  understanding  of brahm and 
Parbrahm.  For  example,  if  a  person,  whose  teeth  have  become  very 
sensitive as a result of sucking lemons, has to chew some chick-peas, 
he would never be able to chew them.  If he was extremely hungry, he 
would at most swallow them, but he would be unable to chew them.  
Similarly,  a  person  who  has  thoroughly  understood  the  greatness  of 
Bhagvãn and   the ãtmã,   feels   no   joy   whatsoever   in   any   of   the 
pleasures  of  the vishays of  any dhãm.    While  the prãrabdha of  the 
body continues, he may indulge in food, drink, and other objects, but 
he would do so in the same way as the person with sensitised teeth, 
swallowing whole chick-peas. 
 
73.31
 “To eradicate worldly desires is indeed an extremely difficult task.  In 
fact,  they  remain  even  after  mastering samãdhi.    After  attaining 
samãdhi, there is no way a person can return back into his body from 
the svarup of brahm.    If  he  does  return,  it  is  because  of  one  of  three 
reasons.    Firstly,  he  returns  to  his  body  from samãdhi if  he  holds 
desires  for  worldly  pleasures.    Secondly,  if  someone  is  extremely 
powerful, he can enter into samãdhi and return to the body according 
to his own will.  Lastly, if there is another person who is much more 
powerful,  then  that  person  can  bring  someone  back  into  their  body 
from samãdhi.    These  are  the  three ways  of  returning  to  the  body 
from samãdhi. 
 
73.32
 “When samãdhi occurs,  a  person  has  the darshan of Brahm and  sees 
the divine light of Brahm to be like that of countless millions of suns.  
At  that  time,  if  that  person  does  not  have  much  understanding,  he 

GADHADÃ I 
- 198 - 
regards the murti of pratyaksha Purushottam Bhagvãn to be inferior, 
and  believes Brahm to  be  superior.    This  leads  to  committing  a 
breach of upãsanã.  That is why firm nishchay should be developed in 
the pratyaksha murti,    because    only    then    can    all    things be 
accomplished.    I  am  also  determined  that  I  shall  not  allow  any  flaw 
whatsoever  to  remain  in  anyone  who  sincerely  surrenders  his  mind 
to  me.    Therefore,  I  shall  not  allow  even  a  little  distance  to  remain 
between us.” 
 
73.33
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “What  are  the  characteristics  of  a 
person    who    has    surrendered    his    mind,    and    what    are    the 
characteristics of a person who has not surrendered his mind?” 
 
73.34
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If a person, who has surrendered his mind 
to Bhagvãn,  is  unable  to  be  present  while  the  talks  of Bhagvãn are 
going  on,  or  for  the darshan of Bhagvãn,  he  experiences  intense 
regret in his heart.  Whenever he listens to the talks of Bhagvãn and 
has   the darshan of Bhagvãn,   his   love   for Bhagvãn continually 
increases,  but  never  does  his  mind  recede  from  those  talks  and 
darshan.  Moreover, when Bhagvãn gives an ãgnã to someone to stay 
far  away,  a  person  who  has  surrendered  his  mind  would  think  to 
himself, ‘If that ãgnã was given to me, I would gladly go to Buranpur or 
Kãshi,  or  anywhere else for that matter’.  A  person,  who  remains 
happy  living  according  to  the  wishes  of Bhagvãn in  this  way,  is  near 
to me; even if he is a thousand miles away. 
 
73.35
 “On the other hand, a person who has not surrendered his mind in 
this  way,  is  as  good as  being  hundreds  of  thousands  of  miles  away, 
even though he may be staying very close to me.  In fact, I am afraid 
of  even  giving  advice  to  a  person  who has  not surrendered his mind 
to  me,  as  I  fear ‘Will he accept it positively or negatively?’  These  are 
the  characteristics  of  a  person  who  has  surrendered  his  mind  and 
who has not surrendered his mind.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 73 || 73 || 

GADHADÃ I 
- 199 - 
Gadhadã I – 74 
Satsang Flourishes Or Declines By The Wish Of Nar-Nãrãyan 
 
74.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on the  morning  of Vaishãkh sud 11  [24
th
 
April,  1820],  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a 
decorated  bedstead  under  the  neem  tree  opposite  the mandir of 
Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan, in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He 
was  dressed  entirely  in  white clothes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
74.2
  Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “The extent of a person’s vairãgya and 
understanding, can be measured only when he encounters vishays, or 
in  times  of  hardship,  but  not  otherwise.    That  being  so,  what  can  be 
said   about   situations   of   extreme   happiness   or   hardship?      For 
example,  everyone  must  have  realised  the  state  of  their  own antah-
karans during   the   minor   difficulty   that   recently   fell   upon   Dãdã 
Khãchar.” 
 
74.3
 Muktãnand Swãmi then said, “It is natural that in a person’s heart, he 
sides with Bhagvãn’s bhaktas, with the understanding that if satsang 
flourishes,  many  people  will  benefit;  but  if  the satsang suffers  a 
setback in any way, no one will benefit.  That is why joy and grief are 
experienced.” 
 
74.4
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj said, “Since  we are  the dãs of Nar-Nãrãyan,  we 
should be pleased with whatever pleases Him.  If it is the wish of Nar-
Nãrãyan,  then  our satsang will  flourish;  and  if  He  wishes  to  make  it 
decrease,  then  it  will  decrease.    Also,  if Nar-Nãrãyan seats  us  on  an 
elephant,  we  should  be  happy;  and  if  He  seats  us  on  a  donkey,  then 
we should also remain happy.  We should not have the slightest love 
for anything except the holy feet of Nar-Nãrãyan.  If there is a person 
who’s mind is attached to just a minor responsibility, then what will 
become of him if he is given the major responsibility of taking care of 
the whole world? 

GADHADÃ I 
- 200 - 
74.5
 “For this reason, our lord, Shree Nar-Nãrãyan,  performs tap while 
sitting under a bordi tree; and He does not touch anything that gives 
worldly pleasures.  That is why we are the dãs of our lord, Shree Nar-
Nãrãyan.  Just as a pati-vratã wife keeps jewellery, clothes, and food, 
less  than  her  husband,  we  should  keep  less  worldly  pleasures  than 
our Shree Nar-Nãrãyan.  
 
74.6
 “If a bhakta wishes great things for Bhagvãn, it is fine if he has these 
wishes  while  doing bhakti,  and  if  he  is nishkãmi.    The bhakta should 
not wish these objects for himself.  Bhagvãn is not at all interested in 
the  enjoyment  of  these  worldly  objects  for  Himself,  but  He  sees  the 
bhakti of the bhakta, and accepts the objects given by them.  
 
74.7
 “Bhagvãn is  the  master  of  millions  of  universes,  and  the  master  of 
Brahmpur, Golok,  and Vaikunth,  and  other dhãms,  and  the  master  of 
Rãdhikãji and Lakshmiji.    If Bhagvãn desired  worldly  objects  and 
enjoyments,  why  would  He  abandon  all  these  things  and  sit  under  a 
bordi tree to perform tap?  Therefore, Bhagvãn can have no desire for 
worldly pleasures.  In comparison to other avatãrs, our Nar-Nãrãyan 
is a greater tyãgi, and performs tap for the kalyãn of jeevs. 
 
74.8
 “If Nar-Nãrãyan has desires for worldly objects, then why does He eat 
berries  and  sit  under  a  tree?    There  are  many  foolish  souls  in  the 
world  who  are  owners  of  land.    If Nar-Nãrãyan,  who  is Bhagvãn, 
wanted some wealth and worldly pleasures, then should He not keep 
at  least  a  few  villages  for  His  own  use?    However, Bhagvãn does  not 
want  anything.    Therefore,  we  should  become  a  greater tyãgi than 
our master.  
 
74.9
 “In whatever way satsang flourishes  by  the  wish  of Bhagvãn,  we 
should  remain  joyful.    If  it  is  the  wish  of Bhagvãn,  then  the  whole 
world  will  become satsangis;  or  if  He  so  wishes,  then satsang will 
decline.    But,  under  no  condition, should  we  have  grief  of  joy  in  our 
minds.  Whatever occurs is due to the actions of Bhagvãn.  So, just as 

GADHADÃ I 
- 201 - 
a dry leaf blows in the air according to the direction of the wind, we 
should  remain  with Bhagvãn and  worship  him,  and  never  let  any 
unhappiness enter our minds.”     
     
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 74 || 74 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 75 
Redeeming Seventy-One Generations 
 
75.1
 In the Samvat year 1876, on Vaishãkh vad 11 [8
th
 May, 1820], Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead 
under the neem tree in front of the mandir of Shree Vãsudev-Nãrãyan 
in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  wearing  a  garland  of 
yellow  flowers  around  His  neck,  and  was dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from various places, 
had gathered before Him. 
 
75.2
 Surã Khãchar then asked, “It is said that seventy-one generations of a 
family,  which  consists  of  a bhakta of Bhagvãn,  attain kalyãn.    But, 
many in that family may even be enemies of Bhagvãn and His sant.  In 
what way do they attain kalyãn?” 
 
75.3 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  answered,  “Devhuti  had  profound  love  towards 
Kardam Rushi as her husband, yet she attained kalyãn because of her 
love  for  him.    The  fifty  daughters  of  Mandhãtã  Rãjã  who  married 
Saubhari  Rushi,  were  attracted  to  him  because  of  his  handsome 
appearance.    Although  their  love  for  Saubhari  was  born  out  of  lust, 
they still all attained kalyãn like Saubhari Rushi himself.  Therefore, if 
all  the  members  of  a  family,  in  which  there  is  a bhakta,  believe ‘We 
are indeed very fortunate to have a bhakta of Bhagvãn in our family’, 
and  keep  love  for  the bhakta with  such  an  understanding  of  his 
greatness, then all the members of the family will attain kalyãn.  Even 
if  the bhakta’s ancestors, who have died and have gone to Svarg, 
realise ‘We are indeed very fortunate to have a bhakta of Bhagvãn in 

GADHADÃ I 
- 202 - 
our  family’,  and  they  also  keep  love  for  the bhakta,  then  those 
ancestors will attain kalyãn as well. 
 
75.4
 “However, a person who keeps hatred towards a bhakta of Bhagvãn, 
does  not  attain kalyãn.    As  his  hatred  towards  the bhakta increases, 
his mind becomes more and more polluted.  In fact, when he dies, he 
falls into  the  same  pit of Narak as  that  entered  by  a  person  who has 
committed the five great sins.  Therefore, all those who have love for 
a bhakta of Bhagvãn, regardless of whether they are family members 
or not, attain kalyãn.” 
 
75.5
 Then,  Nãjã  Bhakta asked, “Suppose there is one bhakta of Bhagvãn 
with firm nishchay, and another with only a little nishchay.  Although 
outwardly   they   both   appear   to   be   good,   how   can   the   two   be 
recognised?” 
 
75.6
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “A person who has precise gnãn of  the 
nature of the ãtmã, firm vairãgya, and perfect bhakti and svadharma, 
should be known to have perfect nishchay.  Even if one of these four 
factors  is  lacking,  then  despite having nishchay,  it  is  still  without  the 
knowledge  of Bhagvãn’s greatness.    If  all  four  factors  are  totally 
present,  then  that  should  be  known  as nishchay in Bhagvãn coupled 
with the knowledge of His greatness.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 75 || 75 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 76 
A Person With Krodh, Irshyã, Kapat, And Mãn 
 
76.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on sud 11  of  the  first Jyeshth [23
rd
 May, 
1820],   Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   seated   in   His 
residence in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed 
entirely  in  white  clothes.    At  that  time,  some  senior sãdhus  were 
seated before Him. 

GADHADÃ I 
- 203 - 
76.2
 Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “There are four types of people I do not get 
along  with, even  if  they  happen  to  be bhaktas of Bhagvãn:    A  person 
with krodh,  a  person  with irshyã,  a  person  with kapat,  and  a  person 
with abhimãn.    Of  these,  both krodh and irshyã are  dependent  on 
abhimãn.  Furthermore, I can never believe a person with kãm to be a 
satsangi.  In fact, even if such a person happens to be in satsang, he is 
as good as a vimukh. 
 
76.3
  “A true satsangi is a person who has absolutely no flaws in following 
the panch-vartmãn,  and  who  remains  totally  undisturbed  until  the 
end of his life, regardless of whatever strict commands I may impose, 
and  force  him  to  abandon  his  preferences  and  enforce  my  own.    I 
effortlessly  and  naturally  develop  love  for  such  a bhakta.    On  the 
other   hand,   I   cannot   develop   love   for   a bhakta without   these 
qualities,  even  if  I  try.    This  is  because  my  nature  is  such  that  I  can 
only  develop  love  for  a  person  who  possesses  perfect bhakti for 
Bhagvãn in his heart.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 76 || 76 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 77 
Not Invalidating Dharma Under The Excuse Of Gnãn 
 
77.1
 In the Samvat year 1876, on vad Amãs of the second Jyeshth [10
th
 July, 
1820], Swãmi Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  west-facing  rooms  in  front  of 
the mandir of Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Gadhadã.  He was dressed entirely in white clothes.  A sabhã of munis, 
as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
77.2
 In   the sabhã,   the munis were   engaged   in   a   question-answer 
discussion amongst themselves.  During the discussion, a muni, out of 
misunderstanding,  began  to  invalidate dharma on  the  basis  of  his 
nishchay in Bhagvãn. 

GADHADÃ I 
- 204 - 
 
77.3
 Hearing this, Shreeji Mahãrãj commented, “A person  who  abandons 
dharma under   the   excuse   of   the gnãn of Bhagvãn,   should   be 
considered   to   be   demonic.      The svarup of Bhagvãn possesses 
countless kalyãn-kãri qualities,   which Pruthvi has   described   to 
Dharma in  the  first skandh of  the  Shreemad  Bhãgvat.    Therefore,  a 
person   who   has   accepted   the   refuge  of Bhagvãn acquires   these 
kalyãn-kãri qualities.      Moreover,   a   person   who   has nishchay in 
Bhagvãn also acquires the thirty characteristics of a sãdhu described 
in the eleventh skandh of the Shreemad Bhãgvat.  Therefore, a person 
who does not possess the thirty characteristics of a sãdhu should not 
be considered to be a true sãdhu.   
 
77.4
 “Conversely, a person who does have nishchay in Bhagvãn definitely 
does  acquire  the kalyãn-kãri qualities  of Bhagvãn within  his  heart.  
When  these  qualities  of Bhagvãn are  acquired  by  a sãdhu,  he  also 
acquires  the  thirty  characteristics  of  a sãdhu.    From  today  onwards, 
whoever abandons dharma (panch-vartmãn), and solely supports the 
strength  of bhakti or gnãn,  is  a  blasphemer  of the guru and guru’s 
word.    Anyone  who  even  talks  of  such  a  lapse  in dharma should  be 
called  a vimukh and  told, ‘You have sided with demons, and we shall 
not accept it’.  With such words, the talks of that sinful person should 
be dismissed.” 
 
77.5
 A sant then asked, “Mahãrãj, there may be an extremely faithful 
bhakta of Bhagvãn who   suffers   great   pain   and   who   babbles 
meaninglessly  at  the  time  of  death,  whereas  a  person  who  does  not 
seem to be a true bhakta appears extremely composed at the time of 
his  death.    In  fact,  he  dies  in  comfort,  realising  the glory  of Bhagvãn, 
and  even  expressing  His  greatness.    What  is  the  reason  behind  this?  
Please  explain  why  a  religious  person’s  death  appears  to  be 
unpleasant in comparison to an ordinary person’s death that appears 
to be pleasant?” 
 
77.6
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “A person’s mind is influenced by the 
eight  factors  of desh, kãl, kriyã, sang, dhyãn, mantra, dikshã,  and 

GADHADÃ I 
- 205 - 
shãstra.  If these eight factors are pure, the mind becomes pure; but, 
if they are impure, the mind becomes impure.  
 
77.7
 “Also, Bhagvãn’s mãyã inspires  the dharmas of  the  four yugs to 
prevail in turn within a person’s heart.  At the time of death, if the 
dharma of Satya-Yug is  prevalent,  then  death  appears  very  pleasant.  
If  the dharma of  either Tretã-Yug or Dvãpar-Yug is  prevalent,  then 
death appears less pleasant.  However, when the dharma of Kali-Yug 
is  prevalent,  death  appears  extremely  unpleasant.    In  this  way,  the 
pleasantness and unpleasantness of death is also determined by kãl. 
 
77.8
 “The three  mental  states – jãgrat, svapna,  and sushupti – are  also 
factors.  At the time of death, if the jãgrat state is prevalent, then even 
a  sinner  would  die  while  still  completely  conscious.    If  the svapna 
state  is  prevalent  at  the  time  of  death,  then  a  person  dies  mumbling 
without    making    sense,    even    if    he    is    a bhakta of Bhagvãn.  
Furthermore,  if  the sushupti state  is  prevalent  at  the  time  of  death, 
then  regardless  of  whether  a  person  is  a bhakta of Bhagvãn or  a 
vimukh,   he   passes   away   unconsciously,   unable   to   say   anything, 
neither  good  nor  bad.    However,  if  a  person  dies  while  thoroughly 
realising his jeevãtmã as greater than these three states and as being 
brahm-rup,  he  passes  away  displaying  all  the  powers  of Bhagvãn.  
Passing away after becoming brahm-rup and displaying such powers, 
is  only  possible  for bhaktas of Bhagvãn.    It  is  not  possible  for  any 
vimukh.      In   this   way, Kãl, as   well   as   the   three   mental   states, 
determines the pleasantness and unpleasantness present at the time 
of death.   
 
77.9
 “However, even if a vimukh dies  speaking  normally,  with  the jãgrat 
state  being  prevalent,  that  does  not  imply  in  any  way  that  he  will 
attain kalyãn.      Regardless   of   whether   he   dies   pleasantly   or 
unpleasantly,  he  will  go  only  to Narak.    Conversely,  regardless  of 
whether  a bhakta of Bhagvãn speaks  normally,  babbles  without 
making  sense,  or  remains  silent  at  the  time  of  death,  he  definitely 
attains kalyãn.  There is no doubt whatsoever in this fact.  All bhaktas 

GADHADÃ I 
- 206 - 
of Bhagvãn should   realise   this.      Although   a bhakta of Bhagvãn 
appears   to   be   suffering   pain   when   passing   away,   he   actually 
experiences great bliss within due to the grace of Bhagvãn.  So, even 
if  at  the  time  of  his  death  a bhakta passes  away  babbling  without 
making sense, there should be no doubts at all regarding his kalyãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 77 || 77|| 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 78 
The Affect Of Desh, Kãl, Kriyã, And Sang 
 
78.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on Ashãdh sud 3  [13
th
 July,  1820],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  the  veranda  outside  the 
west-facing rooms in front of the mandir of Shree Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in 
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  wearing  a  white khes, 
and had covered Himself with a white chãdar.  He was also wearing a 
white pãgh on  His  head  and  a  garland  of  white  flowers  around  His 
neck.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places, 
had gathered before Him. 
 
78.2
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “All sant,  please  listen.    I  wish to  ask  a 
question.” 
 
78.3
 The sants responded, “Please ask, Mahãrãj.” 
   
78.4
 Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “If the eight influences of desh, kãl, kriyã, sang, 
mantra, dhyãn, dikshã,   and shãstras are   pleasant,   they   purify   a 
person’s mind.  However, if these eight influences are unpleasant, 
they pollute a person’s mind.  But, do the sanskãrs of  the karmas 
performed in past lives have any influence on these eight factors?” 
 
78.5
 The munis answered, “It seems that the karmas of past lives do play a 
role.  If a person’s past karmas are  pleasant,  he  is born  in  a  pleasant 
desh.    However,  if  the  past karmas are  unpleasant,  he  is  born  in  an 

GADHADÃ I 
- 207 - 
unpleasant desh.    In  the  same  way,  the  other  seven  factors  are  also 
determined by past karmas.  Therefore, past karmas appear to play a 
major  role  in  all  of  them.    The  eight  influences  may  be  predominant 
in  certain  circumstances,  but  past karmas are  predominant  in  all 
circumstances.” 
 
78.6
 Shreeji   Mahãrãj   then   questioned,  “From  what  principle  in  the 
shãstras do  you  claim  that  past karmas play  the  predominant  role 
among all the eight influences?  Please quote any reference from the 
shãstras.  After all, only in the Jain shãstras, and not in any other, does 
a  person  find  the  predominance  of  only karmas.    Other shãstras 
explain  only  the  predominance  of  the sang of Bhagvãn and  His 
bhaktas.    Moreover,  because  you  support  the  predominance  of  only 
past karmas, are you truly nãstiks superficially disguised as satsangis, 
or  what?    This  is  because  no  one  except  the nãstiks promote  the 
predominance  of karmas.    They  believe  the  Veds,  the shãstras,  the 
Purãns, and the Mahãbhãrat, and other historical shãstras, to be false.  
They only accept their own shãstras, written in the Mãgdhi dialect, as 
authentic.    Therefore,  it  is  only  out  of  foolishness  that  they  only 
promote past karmas. 
 
78.7
 “If the eight influences vary according to past karmas,  then  why  has 
the  hundred-feet-deep  underground  water not  risen  to  the  surface 
for  the  many  religious  kings  who  have  been  born  in  the  region  of 
Marvad?  If the influence of desh was controlled by past karmas, then 
the  water-table  should  rise  for  people  who  have  performed  good 
deeds,  and  fall  for  sinners.    However,  this  is  not  the  case,  because  in 
the  region  of  Marvad,  both  sinners  and  religious  people  suffer  from 
the problem of water being found deep underground.  In reality, each 
desh does  not  lose  its  natural  characteristics.    Therefore,  the  eight 
influences do not vary according to past karmas. 
 
78.8
 “Therefore, a person who desires his own kalyãn should  not  uphold 
the  predominance  of karmas  in  the  way  that nãstiks do.    If  the  eight 

GADHADÃ I 
- 208 - 
influences  are  unpleasant,  he  should  abandon  them  and  seek  only 
pleasant influences. 
 
78.9
 “Moreover, just as pleasant and unpleasant desh exist  outside  the 
body, a person’s body can also be a pleasant or unpleasant desh.    If 
the desh (the  body)  is  pleasant  when  the jeev resides  within  it,  then 
kalyãn-kãri qualities  such  as  nobility,  contentment,  compassion,  and 
dharma, develop.  However, if the desh (the body) is unpleasant when 
the jeev resides  within  it,  then  flaws  such  as kãm, krodh, lobh, moh, 
mad, and matsar develop instead. 
 
78.10
 “Also,  pleasant  and  unpleasant sang should   be   distinguished   as 
follows:    When  no  distance  remains  between  a  person  and  the sang 
he  keeps,  this  is  known  as  true sang.    Outwardly,  even  enemies 
embrace  each  other,  yet  their  hearts  are  hundreds  of  thousands  of 
miles apart.  Such outward sang cannot be called sang.  Only sang that 
is  kept  by  thought,  word,  and  deed,  can  be  called sang.    A  person 
should  keep  such sang – by  thought,  word,  and  deed – only  with 
Bhagvãn or  His bhaktas,  as  it  leads  to  the kalyãn of a person’s jeev.  
However, a person should never keep the sang of a sinner.” 
 
78.11
 Then, at midday, Shreeji Mahãrãj called all the young, student sãdhus 
and requested, “All of you student sãdhus, please ask me questions.” 
 
78.12
 Motã Shivãnand Swãmi then asked, “How can a person who has firm 
nishchay in Bhagvãn, be recognised?” 
 
78.13
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A person with firm nishchay in Bhagvãn 
regards  all  actions  performed  by Bhagvãn as kalyãn-kãri,  whether 
they are good or bad.  In fact, however many countless kinds of kriyã 
a  faithful bhakta witnesses,  whether Bhagvãn wins  or  loses  or  runs 
away,  or  whether  He  shows  pleasure  or  grief,  he  says, ‘All kriyãs of 
Bhagvãn are for the sake of kalyãn’.  If  a bhakta speaks  only  in  this 
way whenever he speaks, then he should be known to have absolute 
nishchay in Bhagvãn.” 

GADHADÃ I 
- 209 - 
78.14
 Then, Nirmanãnand Swãmi asked, “How can a person prevent the 
development  of  a  fault-finding  attitude  towards Bhagvãn and  His 
sãdhus?” 
 
78.15
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  answered, “If a  person possesses  the  previously 
mentioned firm nishchay in Bhagvãn, then he never develops a fault-
finding  attitude  towards Bhagvãn.    Furthermore,  when  he  thinks  of 
the  greatness  of  the dãs of  such  a  great Bhagvãn,  he  never  perceives 
faults in the bhaktas of Bhagvãn either.” 
 
78.16
 Then, Nirmanãnand Swãmi and Nãnã Pragnãnand Swãmi both asked, 
“How can a person see the murti of Bhagvãn in  all  the  three  mental 
states of jãgrat, svapna, and sushupti?” 
 
78.17
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “If  the  pure sanskãrs from  a  person’s 
previous  lives  are  powerful,  then  he  can  constantly  see  the murti of 
Bhagvãn in   all   three   states.      If   a   person,   who   continuously 
experiences  fear,  lust,  or  love  for  something,  can  see  objects  other 
than Bhagvãn constantly  in  all  three  states,  then  what  is  surprising 
about being able to see Bhagvãn constantly as well?  He can definitely 
be seen.” 
 
78.18
 Nãnã Shivãnand Swãmi then asked, “How can a person with a stable 
foundation in satsang be recognised?  That is the first question.  The 
second question is: How can the enemies, like mãn, kãm, krodh, lobh, 
mad, matsar, and irshyã, be destroyed?” 
 
78.19
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  explained,  “A  person  who  is  absolutely  loyal  to 
satsang cannot at all tolerate someone speaking unkindly of satsang.  
For  example,  even  though  a  person  may  have  had  a  disagreement 
with  a  member  of  his  family,  he  would  be  unable  to  tolerate  anyone 
speaking unkindly of them.  Therefore, just as a person is loyal to his 
relatives, if a person is similarly loyal to satsang, then his foundation 
in satsang is stable. 

GADHADÃ I 
- 210 - 
78.20
 “The answer to the second question is as follows:  If a person has 
such  loyalty  for satsang,  how  can  he  possibly  hold mãn or irshyã 
towards sant or satsangis?  Therefore, all the inner enemies, like mãn, 
mad, matsar,  and irshyã,  of  a  person  who  is  loyal  to satsang are 
destroyed.    However,  if  a  person  does  not  have  this  loyalty  for 
satsangis, and regards satsangis and kusangis as equal, then however 
highly he may be regarded in satsang, he is sure to become a vimukh.” 
 
78.21
 Then, Nãnã Ãtmãnand Swãmi asked, “Bhagvãn and  His sant may 
boldly  tell  someone  whatever  needs  to  be  said,  with  the  belief, 
‘Whether he is praised or lectured, he will not fall from satsang in any 
way’.  How  can  a  person  earn  this  trust  of Bhagvãn and His sant?  
That is one question.  The second question is:  How can a person win 
the love of all the sãdhus, just as he has won the love of the sãdhu he 
is presently staying with?” 
 
78.22
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “As in the answer to Shivãnand Swãmi’s 
question,  if  a  person  is  extremely  loyal  to satsang, Bhagvãn and  His 
sant do  not  hesitate  in  lecturing  him.    They  never  lack  faith  in  him, 
and  they  never  feel, ‘If he is lectured, he will leave satsang’.    Instead, 
they have firm faith and believe, ‘His satsang is firm, and so there is no 
danger in lecturing him’. 
 
78.23
 “The answer to the second question is:  He may leave the person he 
was previously staying with because he was unable to get along with 
him, and subsequently go and stay with another person.  Despite this, 
he  is  unable  to  tolerate  others  speaking  unkindly  of  the  person  he 
originally  stayed  with.    Therefore,  all  the sãdhus  feel, ‘This person is 
not  ungrateful.    He  is  a  very  good  sãdhu  because  he  has  not  forgotten 
that he is thankful to the person from whom he has learnt even a little’.  
Realising this, all the sãdhus like him.  On the other hand, if he speaks 
unkindly  of  the  person  he  originally  stayed  with,  all  the sãdhus  feel, 
‘This person is ungrateful.  In the future, if he does not get along with 
any of us, he will surely speak unkindly of us too’.  As  a  result,  no  one 
likes him.” 

GADHADÃ I 
- 211 - 
78.24
 Then, Daharãnand Swãmi asked, “Bhagvãn is  greater  than Akshar, 
mind and speech, and He is invisible to all.  Then, why can everyone 
see Him as pratyaksha?” 
 
78.25
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Bhagvãn – who is beyond Akshar, mind and 
speech,  and  who  is  invisible – Himself,  out  of  compassion,  decides, 
‘May all the enlightened and unenlightened people in Mrutyu-Lok  see 
me’.  Having decided this, Bhagvãn, who will always prevail, becomes 
visible to all people in Mrutyu-Lok out of compassion.” 
 
78.26
 Tyãgãnand Swãmi then asked, “How is Bhagvãn pleased?” 
 
78.27
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “A person who wants to please Bhagvãn 
should  not  wish  for  bodily  comforts.    He  should  not  even  crave  for 
the darshan of Bhagvãn.  To do exactly as Bhagvãn commands, is the 
only way to please Bhagvãn.” 
 
78.28
 Then, Lakshmanãnand Swãmi asked, “With what understanding is a 
person  able  to  feel  the  wonder  of  having  attained  the  profound 
association  of Bhagvãn and  His sãdhus?    Also,  how  can  he  feel  joyful 
all day and night?” 
 
78.29
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A bhakta realises, ‘This Bhagvãn and these 
sãdhus all reside in Vaikunth, Golok, and Brahmpur.  In fact, all of those 
dhãms   are   present   wherever   Bhagvãn   and   these   sãdhus   reside.  
Therefore,  I  am  extremely  fortunate  in  that  I  am  able  to  stay  in  the 
presence  of  these  sãdhus’.  If   he   understands   this,   then   he   will 
experience happiness all day and night, and will sway in an ocean of 
bliss throughout the day.” 
 
78.30
 Paramãtmãnand Swãmi then asked, “How can a person acquire the 
thirty  characteristics  of  a sãdhu described  in  the  eleventh skandh of 
the Shreemad Bhãgvat?” 
 
78.31
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A person who regards a sant, who possesses 
the thirty characteristics, as a guru and as a dev, and associates with 

GADHADÃ I 
- 212 - 
him by thought, word, and deed, acquires those thirty characteristics.  
In fact, all the shãstras state, ‘When a person serves a sant, he becomes 
like the sant’.” 
 
78.32
 Then, Shãntãnand Swãmi asked, “There is one bhakta who constantly 
maintains  his vrutti on  the svarup of Bhagvãn.    There  is  another 
bhakta who  engages  in bhajan and smaran,  and  also  listens  to  and 
engages in kathã and kirtans of Bhagvãn.  Which bhakta of Bhagvãn is 
the better of the two?” 
 
78.33
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  explained,  “A  person  who  experiences nirvikalp 
samãdhi and  is  not  conscious  of  his  body,  is  the  better  of  the  two, 
even  if  he  does  not  engage  in kathã and kirtans of Bhagvãn.    Also, 
there may be someone who is conscious of his body and gets up from 
worship  of  his  own  accord  to  eat,  drink,  and  perform  all  bodily 
activities,  and  still  does  not  listen  to  or  engage  in  the kathã and 
kirtans of Bhagvãn.    In  comparison  to  him,  a  person  who  does  listen 
to kathãs and kirtans is better.” 
 
78.34
 Ãdhãrãnand Swãmi then asked, “How should we behave so that 
Bhagvãn and His sant become pleased?” 
 
78.35
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If we strictly follow the panch-vartmãn, and 
do  not  allow  any  sort  of  failure  in  following  them, Bhagvãn and  His 
sant will be pleased.  There is not even the slightest doubt about this.” 
 
78.36
 Then,  Vedãntãnand  Swãmi  asked,  “If  a  person  has  previously 
behaved improperly, what can a person do to please Bhagvãn and His 
sant?” 
 
78.37
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “Bhagvãn and His sant become displeased 
upon  seeing  impure svabhãvs within  a  person.    When  we  develop  a 
hate towards those svabhãvs, a sant also realises this.  This is because 
whenever  a  person  has  hatred  towards  someone,  the  whole  world 

GADHADÃ I 
- 213 - 
knows.    As  a  result  of  this,  a sant,  who  himself  is  also  an  enemy  of 
those svabhãvs,  sides  with  us  and  imparts  compassion  upon  us, 
showing  us  the  way  to  conquer  those svabhãvs by  whichever  means 
possible.   
 
78.38
 “Therefore, after developing  a  bitter  hatred  towards  root svabhãvs 
that has led to a person’s disgrace, he should adopt a method that 
would  totally  remove  it.    When  we  behave in  this  way, Bhagvãn and 
His sant shower  total  compassion  upon  us.    Whenever Bhagvãn and 
His sant shower  their  compassion,  a  person  continues  to  experience 
extreme bliss within his heart.  Also, a person’s ability to walk on the 
path  of kalyãn increases,  and  the  strength  of  his  enemies,  such  as 
kãm, krodh and lobh,  decreases.    Therefore, Bhagvãn does  help  a 
person  who  keeps  intense  hatred  towards  that  bitter  enemy  which 
causes distress within his heart, which is why it is necessary to have 
hatred  for  the  enemies,  like kãm and krodh.    It  is  therefore  very 
beneficial to develop hatred towards his enemies.” 
 
78.39
 Then, Bhagvadãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, just as a person fears 
Bhagvãn when  he  is  near  Him,  what  understanding  should  a  person 
have so that he fears Bhagvãn just as much when he is far from Him?” 
 
78.40
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “Just as a person maintains the respect of 
Bhagvãn when He is near, the same respect remains when He is far if 
he thoroughly understands the greatness of Bhagvãn.  The greatness 
should  be  understood  as  follows:   ‘Purushottam Bhagvãn – who  is 
greater  than  Akshar;  by  whose  wish,  countless  millions  of  brahmãnds 
are created, and then supported by His powers;  who is vyatirek, yet is 
present  within  everything  as  anvay,  and  while  being  anvay,  is  also 
vyatirek  from  everything;  who  dwells  within  each  and  every  atom  in 
His antaryãmi  svarup  just  as  He  is  in  His  pratyaksha  svarup;  without 
whose   wish,   not   even   a   blade   of   grass   is   able   to   move;   who   is 
responsible  for  creating,  sustaining,  and  destroying  countless  millions 
of   brahmãnds;   who   administers   pain   and   pleasure   to   the   beings 

GADHADÃ I 
- 214 - 
residing in these brahmãnds; who is the sole doer of all that happens – 
incarnates on this earth for the kalyãn of the jeevs.   
 
78.41
 “‘However, when that very Bhagvãn mounts a horse, it appears that the 
horse is carrying Him.  But in reality, it is Bhagvãn who is the upholder 
of  the  horse.    Furthermore,  when  Bhagvãn  sits  on  the  earth,  it  seems 
that the earth is supporting Bhagvãn, but in reality, it is Bhagvãn who 
supports  the  entire  earth  along  with  its  sthãvar  and  jangam  forms  of 
life. 
 
78.42
 “‘At night, the light of the moon, an oil lamp, or a torch allows a person 
to  have  the  darshan  of  Bhagvãn.    During  the  day,  the  light  of  the  sun 
allows a person to have the darshan of Bhagvãn.  In reality, however, it 
is that Bhagvãn who provides light to the sun, the moon, and the flames 
of  fire.    These  are  the  magnificent  powers  of  Bhagvãn.    Despite  this, 
Bhagvãn  has  become  like  a  human  for  the  sake  of  the  kalyãn  of  the 
jeevs, and He is giving darshan to me’.  If  a  person  understands  the 
greatness of Bhagvãn in this way, then he can keep the same respect 
for Bhagvãn when he is far from Him as when he is near Him.” 
 
78.43
 Bhagvadãnand  Swãmi  then  asked  another  question:  “Nothing 
happens  without Bhagvãn’s will.    Everything  that  happens  is  all  the 
work of Bhagvãn alone.  So, when Bhagvãn or His bhaktas encounter 
difficulties,  why  does  He not  ease  their  distress?    Why  does  He  wish 
to increase their distress?” 
 
78.44
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “When Bhagvãn assumes a human svarup, 
it is normal for Him to behave in absolutely the same way as humans 
do, and not reveal His alokik powers.  This is how all the charitras of 
Bhagvãn are described in the shãstras.  Therefore, a person may only 
have  doubts  when Bhagvãn exhibits  new charitras.    But,  as  long  as 
the charitras of Bhagvãn are  like  those  performed  by  the  previous 
avatãrs, there should be no doubts in a person’s mind.” 
 

GADHADÃ I 
- 215 - 
78.45
 Then, Nirmalãnand Swãmi asked, “What understanding is required to 
thoroughly realise the greatness of a sant of Bhagvãn?” 
 
78.46
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “When a person thinks about the greatness 
of Matsya, Kurma, Varãh, Vãman, Parshurãm, Rãm, Krishna,  and  the 
countless avatãrs of Bhagvãn,   and   thinks, ‘Bhagvãn  has  freed 
countless  jeevs  through  Rãm,  Krishna,  and  other  avatars,  and  I am 
extremely fortunate that I have attained the profound association of a 
sant  of  that  very  Bhagvãn’, he   begins   to   thoroughly   realise   the 
greatness of the sant day by day.” 
78.47
 Then, Nãrãyanãnand Swãmi asked, “How is the jeev anvay with  the 
three bodies of sthul, sukshma, and kãran, and how is it vyatirek from 
them?” 
 
78.48
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “When the body encounters pleasures and 
pain, and the jeev takes on that pleasure and pain upon itself, the jeev 
is anvay with  the  three  bodies.    When  it  believes  itself  to  be  distinct 
from  the  pleasures  and  pain  of  the  three  bodies,  then  the jeev is 
vyatirek from them.” 
 
78.49
 Shunyãtitãnand Swãmi then asked, “When a person initially practices 
satsang,  he  has  deep  love  for sant and satsangis.    But,  why  does  this 
love later decline?” 
 
78.50
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “Initially, he holds very high respect for a 
sant.  Later, when he perceives a minor avgun in the sant, he regards 
it  as  a  minor avgun because  of  his  own  malicious  mind.    As  a  result, 
his  vicious  nature  flourishes,  and  his  respect  for  the sant declines.  
Then, if he thoughtfully eradicates this vicious nature, he becomes as 
pure  as  he  was  before.    However,  if  he  does  not  do  so,  he  will 
ultimately become a vimukh.” 
 
78.51
 Prasãdãnand  Swãmi  then  asked, “What is the cause of the jeev’s 
moksh?” 

GADHADÃ I 
- 216 - 
78.52
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “To do exactly as a sant says  without 
having any doubts, is the only cause of the jeev’s moksh.” 
 
78.53
 Then, Trigunãtitãnand Swãmi asked, “What methods should a person 
adopt when faced with unpleasant desh, kãl, kriyã, and sang?” 
 
78.54
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “The only way to overcome unpleasant 
desh, kãl, kriyã,  and sang,  is  to  escape  from  them  by  any  means 
possible.” 
78.55
 Nãnã Nirvikãrãnand Swãmi then asked, “Despite having nishchay in 
Bhagvãn, why is a person’s vãsnã not eradicated?” 
 
78.56
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A person’s vãsnã is  not  eradicated  because 
he has not fully realised the greatness of Bhagvãn.” 
 
78.57
 Then, Motã Yogãnand Swãmi asked, “Despite having perfect nishchay 
in Bhagvãn, why does a person still not develop love for Bhagvãn and 
the kathãs of Bhagvãn?” 
 
78.58
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “It is because he has not yet realised the 
greatness  of Bhagvãn as  it  is.    If  a  person  thoroughly  realises  the 
greatness of Bhagvãn, then he does not develop love for anything else 
besides Bhagvãn,  even  if  he  tries.    In  addition,  he  develops  constant 
love   only   for Bhagvãn,   His sant,   and   the kathãs and kirtans of 
Bhagvãn.” 
 
78.59
 Then,  Pratoshãnand  Swãmi  asked,  “How  can  a  person’s bhakti 
towards Bhagvãn remain constant?” 
 
78.60
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If a person thoroughly understands the 
greatness  of pratyaksha Shree  Krishna Purushottam – who  is  the 
cause  of  the  four avatãrs  of  Aniruddha, Pradyumna, Sankarshan,  and 
Vãsudev,  and  who  is  the  cause  of  the  twenty-four avatãrs – then  he 

GADHADÃ I 
- 217 - 
remains  steady  in  the  nine  types  of bhakti towards Bhagvãn,  like 
smaran and kirtan.” 
 
78.61
 After  answering  the  questions  of  all  the munis in  this  way,  Shreeji 
Mahãrãj asked them all, “Kãm, krodh, and lobh are the three gateways 
to Narak.  All of you please reveal if you have thoroughly conquered 
any of these.” 
 
78.62
 The munis then  spoke  about  the  ones  they  had  conquered.    Hearing 
this  from  the munis,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  became  extremely  pleased.  
After  happily  imprinting  His  holy  feet  on  the  chests  of  Ãtmãnand 
Swãmi,   Yogãnand   Swãmi,   Bhagvadãnand   Swãmi,   and   Shivãnand 
Swãmi, He added, “Just as Mahãnubhavãnand Swãmi and the others, 
are  senior munis,  these  four munis should  also  be  considered  senior 
along with them.  Therefore, do not allow anyone to insult them.” 
 
78.63
 Having advised Muktãnand Swãmi and the other senior sãdhus in this 
way, Shreeji Mahãrãj bid “Jay Sachidãnand” to everyone and returned 
to His residence for His meal.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 78 || 78 || 
 
 
|| End of Shree Gadhadã Pratham Prakaran || 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 218 - 
|| SHREE SWÃMINÃRAYAN VIJAYTETRÃM || 
 
 
VACHANÃMRUT 
Shree Sãrangpur Prakaran 
 
Sãrangpur – 1 
Conquering The Mind 
 
1.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Shrãvan  vad 5  [28
th
 August,  1820], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   the   veranda 
outside   the   north-facing  rooms  of  Jeevã  Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Sãrangpur.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of 
munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before Him. 
 
1.2
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked a question: “The shlok ‘jitam jagat ken 
mano hee yen’ explains  that  a  person  who  has  conquered  the  mind 
has  conquered  the  whole  world.    But,  how can  a  person  know 
whether the mind has been conquered?” 
 
1.3
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “When  the indriyas withdraw   from   the 
panch-vishays (shabda,  sparsh,  rup,  ras, and gandh)  and  no  desire  to 
indulge  in  those vishays remains,  then  all  the indriyas are  said  to  be 
conquered.  Also, when the indriyas do not come into contact with the 
vishays,  the  mind  also  does  not  come  into  contact  with  the indriyas, 
and its vrutti remains within the heart.  In this way, a person who has 
rejected  the panch-vishays with  absolute  determination  should  be 
known  as  having  conquered  his  mind.    But,  if  a  person  does  have 
some  love  for  the vishays,  then  even  if  he  has conquered  his mind, it 
should not be known as having been conquered.” 
 
1.4
 Again, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Can  the vishays be  defeated  by 
vairãgya, or are they defeated by love for Bhagvãn?” 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 219 - 
1.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “One way to defeat the vishays is ãtmã-
nishthã, and the other is the realisation of Bhagvãn coupled with the 
knowledge  of  His  greatness.    Specifically, ãtmã-nishthã should  be  of 
the  following  type:   ‘I am chaitanya, while the body is jad; I am pure, 
whereas  the  body  is  impure;  I  am  imperishable,  while  the  body  is 
perishable;  I  am  the  embodiment  of  bliss,  whereas  the  body  is  the 
embodiment of misery’.  In this way, when a person realises the ãtmã 
to  be  totally  distinct  from  the  body  in  every  way,  he  will  never 
consider himself to be the body nor will he have love for the vishays.  
That  is  how  the vishays are  restrained  through  knowledge  of  the 
ãtmã. 
 
1.6
 “Also, a person should think of the greatness of Bhagvãn in  the 
following  way:   ‘I am the ãtmã, while pratyaksha Bhagvãn, whom I 
have  attained,  is  Paramãtmã.    I  have  attained  Shree  Purushottam 
Bhagvãn  in  person,  the  very  Purushottam  Bhagvãn  who  is the  lord  of 
Golok,  Vaikunth,  Shvet-Dvip,  and  Brahmpur,  as  well  as  the  master  of 
Brahmã and  the  other  devs,  who  themselves  are  the  lords  of  countless 
millions of brahmãnds.  That Paramãtmã forever resides in my ãtmã.  I 
would discard all of my pleasures for the vishays of countless millions of 
brahmãnds, just for one second of darshan of that Bhagvãn.  Moreover, 
if  a  person  were  to  gather  together  all  the  pleasures  of  the  vishays  of 
countless millions of brahmãnds, even then it would not equal even one 
millionth  of  a  fraction  of  the  bliss  which  is  present  in  just  one  pore  of 
Bhagvãn.    In  fact,  in  the  Moksh-Dharma,  it  is  said  that  the  loks  of  the 
other devs are like Narak, compared to the Akshardhãm of Bhagvãn.  It 
is  that  very  Bhagvãn  whom  I  have  attained  in His  pratyaksha  svarup.  
So  how  can  I  possibly  discard  Him  and  wish  for  the  pleasures  of  the 
vishays, which are like the pits of Narak?  The pleasures of the vishays 
are nothing but the embodiment of misery’.  So,  the vishays can  be 
restrained by realising Bhagvãn’s greatness in this way. 
 
1.7
 “The vairãgya generated  by  knowledge  of ãtmã and Paramãtmã is 
such  that  it  eradicates  desires  of  the  pleasures  of  all vishays.    A 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 220 - 
person  who  has  rejected  the  pleasures  of  the vishays by  developing 
an  understanding  in this  way,  never  again  develops  love  for  the 
vishays.  Only such a person’s mind can be said to be conquered. 
 
1.8
 “Without this understanding, it may appear that a person has love, 
but  when  he  encounters  an  appealing vishay,  he  abandons Bhagvãn 
and  develops  love  for  that  object.    Or,  if  he develops  love for his  son 
or  wife,  or  he  suffers  an  illness,  or  the  pleasures  of  the vishays 
disappear,  then  his  love  for Bhagvãn decreases,  and  he  becomes 
confused.  Just as a dog’s puppy appears cute when it is young, the 
bhakti of such a person initially appears to be good, but ultimately it 
does not remain appealing.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur || 1 || 79 || 
 
 
Sãrangpur – 2 
Developing Love For Bhagvãn 
 
2.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Shrãvan  vad 6  [29
th
 August,  1820], 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  facing  north,  on  a  decorated  bedstead 
which  had  been  placed  on  the  veranda  outside  the  north-facing 
rooms of Jeevã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Sãrangpur.    He  was  wearing  a 
white khes and  had  tied  a  white pãgh around  His head.    He  had  also 
covered Himself with a white pachhedi.  A sabhã of munis, as well as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
2.2
 Then,  addressing  the munis, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Please begin a 
question-answer discussion amongst yourselves.” 
 
2.3
 Svayamprakãshãnand  Swãmi  then  asked,  “How  can  a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn develop intense love for the murti of Bhagvãn?” 
 
2.4
 The munis then    attempted    to    answer    the    question    amongst 
themselves, but were unable to give a precise answer. 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 221 - 
2.5
 So,  Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Love can develop due to beauty, due to 
lust,  due  to  greed,  due  to  some  selfish  motives,  or  due  to  the  other 
person’s qualities.  Of these, love which stems from beauty lasts only 
until  a  person  sees  the  disfigurement  caused  by  leprosy in  the other 
person’s body, or until the person develops leukoderma.  After that, 
the  love  which  once  existed  would  dissolve.    In  the  same  way,  love 
stemming from greed, lust, and selfishness also eventually dissolves.  
However,   love   developed   due   to   the  other  person’s  qualities, 
ultimately survives.” 
 
2.6
 Then, Somlã Khãchar asked Shreeji Mahãrãj, “Which qualities are 
these?  Are they external ones, or internal ones?” 
 
2.7
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “How is it possible to develop love due to 
external qualities?  To be more precise, it is love stemming from the 
qualities of the person’s speech, thoughts, and deeds, which does not 
dissolve.    Now,  are  you  asking  only  about  a bhakta developing  love 
for Bhagvãn?  Or, are you also asking about Bhagvãn developing love 
for the bhakta?” 
 
2.8
 Svayamprakãshãnand Swãmi clarified, “We are asking about both.” 
 
2.9
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then began to explain by saying, “A person should 
not  hurt  any  living  being  with  his  speech.    Also,  during  a  question-
answer discussion where principles are being debated with Bhagvãn 
and a senior sãdhu, those who are junior should give in to those who 
are  senior.    Also,  in  a sabhã,  he  should  not  ask  questions  that  may 
embarrass  a sãdhu who  is  senior  to  himself.    Instead,  he  should 
purposely   accept   defeat   before Bhagvãn and   a   senior sãdhu, 
regardless  of  whether  it  seems  appropriate  or  inappropriate.    Of 
these, he would not doubt an appropriate ãgnã.  But, even if it seems 
inappropriate and leads to doubts, he should not refuse to abide by it, 
at  least  at  that  time.    He  should  certainly  agree  and  say, ‘Mahãrãj, I 
will do just as you say’.  If  that ãgnã is  such  that  he  cannot  accept  it, 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 222 - 
and  if  it  is  the  wish  of Bhagvãn and  a  senior sãdhu to hear  his  plea, 
then  he  should  fold  his  hands  before  them  and  say  with bhakti, 
‘Mahãrãj,  the ãgnã which you gave me is fine, but I have certain doubts 
about it’.  In this way, he should speak modestly.  However, if it is not 
really  the  wish  of Bhagvãn to hear  his  plea,  then  he  should  say  to  a 
senior sãdhu or a bhakta who is close to Him, ‘Although Bhagvãn has 
given such an ãgnã, I simply cannot accept it’.  Then, the senior sãdhu 
would  find  a  compromise  regarding  that ãgnã.    However,  regardless 
of  whether the ãgnã seems  appropriate  or  inappropriate,  he  should 
not  immediately  refuse  to  abide  by  it.    He  should  use  politeness  to 
delay  the  following  of  the ãgnã given  by  those  who  are  senior,  but 
when  initially  told,  he  should  not  immediately  refuse.    This  is  how  a 
person should  behave  regarding  the  qualities of speech.    As  a result, 
Bhagvãn and  the  senior sãdhu develop  love  for  that bhakta,  and  the 
bhakta also develops strong love towards Bhagvãn. 
 
2.10
 “Next, how should a person behave physically?  Well, if his body 
seems  to  be  hyperactive,  he  should  weaken  it  by  engaging  in bhajan 
or  by  keeping  the chãndrãyan vrat.    Then,  on  noticing  this,  it  is  well 
and  good  if Bhagvãn or  a  senior sãdhu takes  care  of  his  body.  
However,  he  should  knowingly  take  care  of  his  own body.    Also,  he 
should physically serve Bhagvãn and His bhaktas.  When Bhagvãn or 
a  great sãdhu notices  a  person  behaving  in  this  way  physically,  they 
develop love for him, and that bhakta also develops love for Bhagvãn. 
 
2.11
 “Now, I shall describe the way  in  which  a  person  should  behave 
regarding  the  qualities  of  the  mind.    When  a bhakta does darshan of 
Bhagvãn,  he  should  do  so  with  a  focused  mind  and  concentrated 
vision.  Instead, when a person, or a dog, or some other animals, or a 
bird,  disturbs  him  while  he  is  performing darshan of Bhagvãn,  then 
his vrutti is broken from Bhagvãn’s darshan.  He begins to glance here 
and   there,   up   and   down,   and   also  see   them  at   the   same   time.  
Bhagvãn and  the  senior sãdhus are  not  at  all  pleased  upon  seeing  a 
person with such wandering vision. 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 223 - 
2.12
 “When such a bhakta does perform darshan, how does he do it?  Well, 
he  does it  just  as  any  ordinary  person  does.    A  person  who  has such 
an ordinary vision, should be known to be like a squirrel that squeaks 
and raises its tail at the same time.  He performs darshan of Bhagvãn 
and  notices  other  objects  at  the  same  time.    When  he  begins  to 
perform darshan in  such  an  ordinary  way,  he  does  not  remain  as 
devout as he previously was, and he declines day by day.  Therefore, 
while performing darshan of Bhagvãn a person should not look from 
side to side.  
 
2.13
 “The novelty and divinity experienced in a person’s heart at the time 
of  the  first darshan of Bhagvãn,  should  remain  exactly  the  same.  
Moreover,  he  should  look  at  the murti with  a  fixed  gaze,  and  then 
closing his eyes, he should internalise that murti, exactly as it, is in his 
heart.      For   example,   in   Dharmapur,   Kushalkunvar-Bãi   did   my 
darshan,  and  at  the  same  time,  closed  her  eyes  and  internalised  the 
murti in  her  heart.   Similarly,  a  person  should  perform darshan with 
an  attentive  mind  and  a  fixed  gaze,  but  he  should  not  perform 
darshan as  other  ordinary  people  do.    If,  along  with  the darshan of 
Bhagvãn,  he  also  looks  at  the  other  people,  or  cats,  or  dogs,  then 
when he has a dream, he sees not only Bhagvãn, but also those other 
objects.    That  is  why  a  person  should  perform darshan of Bhagvãn 
with a fixed gaze, and not with a wandering gaze. 
  
2.14
 “A person who performs darshan of Bhagvãn while keeping his sight 
under  control,  will  feel  that darshan to  be  continually  new.    In 
addition,  he  would  also  feel  any ãgnã that Bhagvãn may  have  given, 
to  be  new.    On  the  other  hand,  a  person  who  performs darshan 
superficially,  with  a  ordinary  vision,  would  feel Bhagvãn’s darshan 
and ãgnã to  be  ordinary.    Although  he  may  perform darshan every 
day,  for  such  a  person it  is  as if he has  not  performed darshan at  all.  
When  such  a  person  engages  in bhajan,  his  mind  would  not  remain 
stable.    Specifically,  when  he  attempts  to  concentrate  on Bhagvãn 
while his thinking is dispersed, other objects he may have seen would 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 224 - 
spontaneously come into his mind, along with Bhagvãn.  Therefore, a 
person  should  perform darshan only  of Bhagvãn.    The  mind  of  this 
person  remains  only  on Bhagvãn during bhajan and smaran.    His 
thinking    does    not    become    dispersed.        Instead,    it    becomes 
concentrated. 
 
2.15
 “Furthermore, I am able to determine when a person is performing 
darshan with  wandering  eyes.    A  great sãdhu whose  own  sight  and 
mind  are  kept  under  control  also  realises, ‘This person is performing 
darshan in a superficial way’.  A person who performs darshan in such 
an ordinary way, then begins to decline from satsang day by day. 
 
2.16
 “For example, a man who is  overcome  by kãm fixes  his  gaze  on  a 
beautiful woman with a focused mind.  At that time, if some animal or 
bird  were  to  pass  by  or  make  a  noise,  he  would  not  notice  it.    In  the 
same way, a person should attach himself to Bhagvãn with a similarly 
focused gaze, but he should not perform darshan in an ordinary way.” 
 
2.17
 Then, Nirvikãrãnand Swãmi raised a doubt, “Mahãrãj, we have to 
travel and speak to people all over the country.  As a result, our mind 
does not remain concentrated.” 
 
2.18
 In reply, Shreeji Mahãrãj questioned, “I have given an ãgnã for you to 
speak to people, but when have I ever given an ãgnã for you to ignore 
the darshan of this murti and perform darshan of other things?” 
 
2.19
 Having said this, Mahãrãj continued, “The same divinity that a person 
feels when he has darshan of the murti of Bhagvãn for the first time, 
can  be  retained if he  keeps  his mind  and  gaze  fixed  on Bhagvãn.   So, 
when he behaves in this way, in accordance with the qualities of the 
mind  mentioned  previously,  then  the  love  that Bhagvãn has  for  that 
bhakta remains  renewed.    Moreover,  the  love  which  that bhakta has 
towards Bhagvãn also constantly remains renewed. 
 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 225 - 
2.20
 “Also, both the eyes and ears should especially be kept under control.  
This is because worldly talks are prevalent everywhere.  If a person is 
attracted towards them through the vrutti of the ears, and he listens 
to  them,  then  all  of  those  worldly  words  would  be  recalled  when  he 
attempts to engage himself in bhajan.  Furthermore, anything seen by 
a  person  who  has  a  wandering  gaze,  is  also  recalled  during bhajan.  
That  is  why  both  of  these indriyas should  be  kept  strictly  under 
control.    However,  while  performing darshan of Bhagvãn’s murti,  if 
the vrutti of  person’s eyes and ears leaves the murti aside  and  is 
attracted towards other things, he should lecture them, by saying, ‘O 
fools!  What are you going to achieve by looking at svarups other than 
Bhagvãn,  and  by  listening  to  words  other  than  the  talks  of  Bhagvãn?  
As  of  yet,  you  have  not  attained  siddh-dashã  where  you  can  instantly 
receive  whatever  you  wish.    This is  because  you  are still  in the  process 
of  attaining  siddh-dashã.    As  a  result,  you  are  not  going  to  be  able  to 
obtain  those  vishays  that  you  desire.    So,  why  are  you  pointlessly 
grasping  for  them  and  leaving  Bhagvãn  aside?    Moreover,  even  if  you 
were to attain some insignificant vishay, then due to the sin incurred as 
a  result,  there  will  be  no  end  to  the  beatings  you  will  receive  in 
Yampuri’.  In this way, a person should tell off his eyes and ears. 
 
2.21
 “A person should also tell them, ‘When you become stabilised in the 
murti  of  Bhagvãn,  you  will  attain  siddh-dashã in  this  very  life.    As  a 
result,  you  will  be  able  to  naturally  hear  any  talks  occurring  in  any 
brahmãnd.    If  you  desire  to  have  a  charming  svarup  like  that  of 
Brahmã, Vishnu, or Shiv, then you will be able to attain such a svarup.  
Or,  if  you  wish,  you  will  become  a  bhakta  like  Lakshmi  or  Rãdhikã.  
Moreover, while worshipping Bhagvãn, if you do not attain siddh-dashã 
in  this very  life,  you  will  attain  siddh-dashã  after  death  when  you 
become a mukta.  However, without attaining siddh-dashã, even if you 
constantly look at some beautiful object until you die, you will still not 
be  able  to  attain  that  beauty;  and  even  if  you  listen  to  worldly  talks 
until you die, you will still not attain anything.  Instead, your mind will 
become extremely polluted by it’.  In this way, a person should advise 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 226 - 
his eyes and ears, and keep them fixed only on the murti of Bhagvãn.  
A person, who behaves in this way, increasingly develops love for the 
murti of Bhagvãn day  by  day.    As  a  result, Bhagvãn’s love  and  the 
great sãdhu’s love for that bhakta, also increases day by day.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur || 2 || 80 || 
 
 
Sãrangpur – 3 
‘Shravan’, ‘Manan’, ‘Nididhyãs’, ‘Sãkshãtkãr’ 
Mãnsi Pujã 
 
3.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on  the  evening  of Shrãvan  vad 7  [30
th
 
August,  1820],  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead 
on  the  veranda  outside  the  rooms  of  Jeevã  Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Sãrangpur.    He  was  wearing  a  white khes and  had  tied  a  white pãgh 
around His head.  He had also covered Himself with a black-bordered 
khes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places, 
had gathered before Him. 
 
3.2
 Svayamprakãshãnand Swãmi then asked Shreeji Mahãrãj a question: 
“Mahãrãj, suppose there is a bhakta who physically performs pujã of 
pratyaksha  Bhagvãn with  various  types pujã items.    Also,  suppose 
there  is  another bhakta who  performs mãnsi pujã of Bhagvãn using 
various imaginary items.  Of the two, which bhakta is better?” 
 
3.3
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “If  a  person  lovingly  performs pujã of 
Bhagvãn,  with  hair-raising  sentiments  and  an  emotion-filled  voice, 
then  regardless  of  whether  he  performs  physical pujã or mãnsi pujã, 
both   are   superior.      On   the   other   hand,   if   he   performs pujã 
mechanically – without   feeling   love   or   excitement,   and   without 
showing   emotion   in   his   voice – then   regardless   of   whether   he 
performs  physical pujã of Bhagvãn or mãnsi pujã of Bhagvãn,  both 
are inferior.” 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 227 - 
3.4
 Then, Somlã Khãchar asked, “By what characteristics can a person 
recognise   a bhakta who   becomes   overwhelmed   with   love   while 
performing physical pujã or mãnsi pujã of Bhagvãn?” 
 
3.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Such a person has intense shraddhã in 
performing  the pujã of Bhagvãn and  serving  Him,  in  listening  to 
kathãs  and  talks  related  to Bhagvãn,  and  in  singing kirtans.    He  also 
understands  the  profound  greatness  of Bhagvãn.    With  each  passing 
day,  both  of  these  two  aspects  remain  renewed,  but  never  diminish.  
For example, Muktãnand Swãmi’s shraddhã and  understanding  of 
Bhagvãn’s greatness  are  exactly  the  same  today  and  just  as  new  as 
they were when I first saw him in Lojpur.  They have not diminished 
in  any  way  whatsoever.    In  the  same  way,  such  a bhakta should  be 
recognised by these two characteristics. 
 
3.6
 “All the Yãdavs who stayed with Shree Krishna Bhagvãn, did not have 
such shraddhã or understanding of Bhagvãn’s greatness.  They served 
Him  just  like  they  would  serve  other  kings.    Therefore,  they  did  not 
achieve  fame  and  are  not  even  regarded  as bhaktas.    On  the  other 
hand,  Uddhavji  served Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn with shraddhã and  an 
understanding of His greatness, and therefore he has been described 
as  a  great bhakta of Bhagvãn and  has  been  extremely  renowned  in 
the shãstras and in the world.” 
 
3.7
 Then,  Nirvikãrãnand  Swãmi  asked,  “Mahãrãj,  what  are shravan, 
manan, nididhyãs, and sãkshãtkãr?” 
 
3.8
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “To listen to a talk through the ears, is 
known  as shravan.    Then,  after  hearing  the  talk,  to  mentally  think 
over  the  talk,  and  to  discard  parts  of  the  talk  which  are  not  needed 
and  to  retain  the  parts  of  the  talk  which  are  useful,  is  known  as 
manan.    Then,  after  having  mentally  retained  the  talk  with nishchay, 
the practice of continuously recalling the talk day and night is known 
as nididhyãs.  Finally, when that talk is recalled exactly as it was, with 
absolute clarity and sincerity, it is known as sãkshãtkãr. 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 228 - 
3.9
 “If a person engages in shravan, manan,  and nididhyãs about  the 
svarup of  the ãtmã,  then  he  will  attain sãkshãtkãr of  the ãtmã.  
Furthermore, if a person engages in shravan, manan, and nididhyãs of 
Bhagvãn,  then  he  will attain sãkshãtkãr of Bhagvãn.   Sãkshãtkãr 
cannot  be  attained  by  doing shravan alone,  without  practicing  both 
manan and nididhyãs. 
 
3.10
 “If a person does not practice manan and nididhyãs following  the 
darshan of Bhagvãn’s murti,  then  even  if  he  performs darshan for 
thousands of years, he will not attain sãkshãtkãr of that murti.  This is 
because this kind of darshan is like having done only shravan.  On the 
other hand, if a person has had darshan of Bhagvãn’s entire body, and 
has then done manan and nididhyãs of all the parts of His body, then 
he  will  be  able  to  easily  recall  those  parts even  today.    Conversely,  a 
person who has performed only darshan of Bhagvãn’s body would be 
unable to recall it, even if he attempted to recall it. 
 
3.11
 “Also, there are  some bhaktas who  say, ‘We sit in meditation and try 
very hard to recall Mahãrãj’s murti, yet we cannot visualise even a 
single part.  Then, how can we possibly envision the whole murti?’  The 
reason for this is the same as above – they merely perform darshan of 
the murti,  without  doing manan and nididhyãs.    So,  how  can  it  be 
visualised?    After  all,  if  a  person  has  merely  seen  even  a  worldly 
object  with  his  eyes,  or  merely  listened  to  it  with  his  ears,  and  it  is 
not  later  mentally  recalled,  it  will  be  forgotten.    Then,  how  can  he 
expect  to  remember  the murti of Bhagvãn,  which  is divya and  not 
worldly, without doing manan and nididhyãs? 
 
3.12
 “Therefore, if a person continuously engages in manan and nididhyãs 
after  performing darshan of Bhagvãn and  listening  to  His  talks,  then 
he  will  attain sãkshãtkãr of  them.    Otherwise,  even  if  he  performs 
darshan and shravan for  the  rest  of  his  life,  he  will  still  not  attain 
sãkshãtkãr.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur || 3 || 81 || 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 229 - 
Sãrangpur – 4 
Ãtmã And Non-Ãtmã 
 
4.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Shrãvan  vad 8  [31
st
 August,  1820], 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was sitting  facing  north  on  a decorated  bedstead  on 
the  veranda  outside  the  rooms  of  Jeevã  Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Sãrangpur.  He was wearing a white khes, and had tied a white pãgh 
around  His  head.    He  had  covered  Himself  with  a  white pachhedi.    A 
sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had 
gathered before Him. 
 
4.2
 Svayamprakãshãnand Swãmi then asked a question:  “Mahãrãj, how 
should a person clearly understand the distinction between the ãtmã 
and non-ãtmã, which will never cause him to mistake ãtmã and non-
ãtmã to be one?” 
 
4.3
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “That  which  is  understood  clearly  is 
beneficial – whether it is understood by one verse, or by two verses, 
or  by  five  verses,  or  by  a  hundred  verses,  or  even  by  a  thousand 
verses.  So, once a person has developed such a clear understanding, 
no  misconception  remains  about  the ãtmã and  non-ãtmã being  one.  
Furthermore,   only   such   clear   understanding   leads   to   happiness, 
whereas   a   foolish   understanding   does   not   lead   to   happiness.  
Therefore,  a  person  should  clearly  understand, ‘I am the ãtmã, and 
not  a  single  one  of  my  characteristics  can  be  found  in  the  body.    Also, 
not one of the characteristics of the body – which is jad, full of misery, 
and  perishable – can be found in me, since I am chaitanya’.  After 
making   such   a   distinction   and   becoming   totally   free   of   worldly 
desires,  a  person  should  believe  himself  to  be chaitanya and  then 
think of Purushottam Bhagvãn.  Distinguishing between that which is 
jad and  that  which is chaitanya in  this  way should be  known  as  true 
wisdom. 
 
4.4
 “However, a person who believes himself to be the ãtmã for a while, 
but  then  believes  himself  to  be  the  body  for  a  while  and  fantasises 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 230 - 
about women,  should  be  known  as  a  fool.    He  will  not  experience 
happiness  in  his  heart.    For  example,  there  may  be  some  delicious 
food  which  is  comparable  to amrut ,  but  if  just  a  small  amount  of 
poison  were  to  be  mixed  with  it,  then  that  food  would  never  give  a 
person pleasure, but would in fact lead to misery.  In the same way, a 
person may think of that ãtmã all day, but if he believes himself to be 
the  body  and  fantasises  about  women,  even  for  just  a  moment,  then 
all of his thoughts are useless.  Therefore, a person should think only 
of the ãtmã, so he can become totally free of worldly desires. 
 
4.5
 “Now, someone may doubt: ‘What will become of me if I do not 
become  totally  free  of  worldly  desires  and  happen  to  die  in  that 
imperfect state?’  Well,  a bhakta of Bhagvãn should  never  think  like 
that.  Instead, he should realise, ‘If anything dies, it is this body.  But as 
I am that ãtmã, which does not age and is immortal, I will never die’.  
Having   developed   such   an   understanding,   he   should   maintain 
courage, keep a firm mind, and discard all desires other than those of 
Bhagvãn. 
 
4.6
 “Then, in the process of eradicating worldly desires in this way, if a 
few  desires  do  remain,  he  will  attain  the Naraks described  in  the 
Moksh-Dharma.    Specifically,  if  a bhakta of Bhagvãn retains  any 
desires for the world, then he attains the loks of Indra and other devs.  
After migrating to those loks, he experiences the pleasures of apsãrãs, 
heavenly  vehicles,  palaces  decorated  with  jewels,  and  other  luxuries 
– which  are  like Narak,  in  comparison  to  the dhãm of Bhagvãn.  
However, a bhakta of Bhagvãn does not go to Yampuri, like a vimukh, 
nor does he re-enter the cycle of births and deaths. 
 
4.7
 “Therefore,  even  if  a bhakta of Bhagvãn has  worldly   desires,   if 
nothing  else,  he  will  become  a dev.    Then,  having  become  a dev,  he 
will  become  a  human  again.    As  a  human,  after  offering bhakti to 
Bhagvãn and  becoming  free  of  worldly  desires,  he  will  ultimately 
attain the dhãm of Bhagvãn.  But, he will not have to suffer from the 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 231 - 
miseries  of Narak or  the  cycle  of  births  and  deaths,  like  the vimukh.  
Bearing   this   in   mind,   a bhakta of Bhagvãn should   not   become 
discouraged  on  seeing  the  force  of  worldly  desires.    Instead,  he 
should   joyfully   continue   to   worship Bhagvãn,   continue   in   his 
attempts  to eradicate  his  desires,  and  maintain  absolute  faith  in  the 
words of Bhagvãn and His sant.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur || 4 || 82 || 
 
 
Sãrangpur – 5 
Worldly Desires Are Defeated By Bhakti 
 
5.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Shrãvan  vad 9  [1
st
 September,  1820], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  north-facing  rooms  of  Jeevã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Sãrangpur.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from various places, 
had gathered before Him. 
 
5.2
 Then,  Muktãnand  Swãmi  asked  a  question:  “Which  method  of 
eradicating  worldly  desires  is  so  powerful  that  it  alone  incorporates 
all other methods?” 
 
5.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The worldly desires of a person  will  be 
eradicated,  if  he  has  the  following  four  characteristics  in  his  heart:  
shraddhã,  faith  in  the  words  of Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas,  love  for 
Bhagvãn, and the knowledge of the greatness of Bhagvãn’s svarup.  Of 
these, if the knowledge of Bhagvãn’s greatness is extremely powerful 
and  the  other  three – shraddhã,  faith,  and  love – are  weak,  they  will 
also  become  extremely  powerful.    On  the  other  hand,  although  a 
person may appear to have intense bhakti, if it is not coupled with the 
knowledge  of Bhagvãn’s greatness,  it  will  ultimately  be  destroyed.  
For example, a ten-year-old girl who has contracted tuberculosis will 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 232 - 
certainly  die  before  she  matures  into  a  young  woman.    Similarly,  a 
person whose bhakti lacks the knowledge of Bhagvãn’s greatness will 
find that his bhakti will be destroyed before it matures. 
 
5.4
 “Furthermore, if a person has bhakti for Bhagvãn in his heart coupled 
with  the  knowledge  of Bhagvãn’s greatness,  then  even  though  he 
does   not   possess   any   other kalyãn-kãri qualities,   they   will   still 
develop in his heart.  Conversely, if a person does not have bhakti in 
his  heart  coupled  with  the  knowledge  of Bhagvãn’s greatness,  then 
even  though  he  possesses kalyãn-kãri qualities,  such  as  tranquillity 
and self-restraint, they are as good as being absent because they will 
ultimately be destroyed. 
 
5.5
 “Therefore,  even  if  a  person  has  only bhakti coupled   with   the 
knowledge  of Bhagvãn’s greatness,  his  worldly  desires  will  still  be 
eradicated,  and  all  the kalyãn-kãri qualities  will  develop  and  reside 
within  his  heart.   Bhakti of Bhagvãn coupled  with  the  knowledge  of 
His greatness is the greatest and most reliable method to eradicate a 
person’s worldly desires.” 
 
5.6
 Then, Svayamprakãshãnand Swãmi asked, “What is the anvay nature 
of the jeev, and what is its vyatirek nature?  What is the anvay nature 
of ishvar,  and  what  is  its vyatirek nature?    How  should Purushottam 
Bhagvãn be known in His anvay form, and how should He be known 
in His vyatirek form?” 
 
5.7
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “When the jeev is said to experience births 
and deaths, that should be known as the jeev’s anvay form.  When the 
jeev is  said  to  be achhedhya, abhedhya,  and avinãshi,  that  should  be 
known as the jeev’s vyatirek form. 
 
5.8
 “When ishvar behaves as one with its three bodies of virãt, sutrãtmã, 
and avyãkrut,  that  should  be  known  as  the anvay form  of ishvar.  
When ishvar is described as sachidãnand, and as greater than its body 
(the brahmãnd), that should be known as the vyatirek form of ishvar. 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 233 - 
5.9
 “The anvay form  of Akshar is  the  inspirer  of Prakruti-Purush and  all 
the devs, such as Surya, and Chandra.  The form in which there is not 
even  a  trace  of  the  influence  of Prakruti-Purush,  and  in  which  only 
Purushottam Bhagvãn resides, should be known as the vyatirek form 
of Akshar. 
 
5.10
 “The anvay form of Purushottam is that which resides in the hearts of 
both  bound jeevs  and  released jeevs  as  their  witness.    However,  He 
remains  untouched  by  such  states  of  bondage  and  release.    In  the 
same way, He also resides in the hearts of ishvars and Akshar as their 
witness, but He remains unaffected by their influence.  The form that 
is  greater  than jeev, ishvar,  and Akshar should  be  known  as  the 
vyatirek form  of Purushottam.    These  are  the anvay-vyatirek natures 
of the various entities.” 
 
5.11
 Again, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Does the importance of Bhagvãn’s 
darshan,   the   importance   of   chanting   His   holy   name,   and   the 
importance  of  the  touch  of Bhagvãn,  apply  only  to  the bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn, or does it also apply to all beings?” 
 
5.12
 Shreeji   Mahãrãj  answered,  “The  modes  of darshan are   certainly 
different,  so  please  listen  as  I  explain  them  to  you.    When  a  person 
does darshan of Bhagvãn with  his  eyes  coupled  with  his  mind,  then 
that darshan could  not  be  forgotten,  even  if  he  tired  to  forget  it.    In 
the  same  way,  if  the  skin  is  coupled  with  the  mind  when  he  touches 
Bhagvãn, then that touch will also not be forgotten.  For example, the 
Shreemad   Bhãgvat   narrates   the   words   spoken   by   the gopis to 
Bhagvãn:   ‘O Bhagvãn!  Since the day we touched your feet, all  the 
pleasures of the world, apart from you, have seemed like poison to us’.  
Similarly,  when  all  the gnãn-indriyas are  coupled  with  the  mind  and 
are then engaged in darshan, listening, and touching, the experiences 
are never forgotten. 
 
5.13
 “To give another  example,  an  ignorant  person  who  indulges  in  the 
vishays when  the  five gnãn-indriyas are  coupled  with  his  mind,  can 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 234 - 
never  forget  them,  even  if  he  wants  to  forget  them.    Similarly,  only 
that darshan of Bhagvãn, and listening to the talks of Bhagvãn, which 
have been done with the mind engaged, should be known as darshan 
and listening. 
 
5.14
 “On the other hand, a person may do darshan, but it is as good as not 
having done darshan at all.  This is because at the time he was doing 
darshan,  his  mind  was wandering  elsewhere.    As  a  result,  he  will 
certainly forget that darshan within a day, or maybe within five days, 
or  maybe  within  fifty  days,  or  maybe  within  six  months,  or  maybe 
after one year, or after five years; eventually, it will not remain. 
 
5.15
 “Therefore,  only  a  person  who  engages  the  five gnãn-indriyas (eyes, 
ears,  nose,  tongue,  skin)  coupled  with  the  mind,  in  the darshan and 
touch  of Bhagvãn with  intense  love  and  the  understanding  of  His 
greatness,  attains  the  fruits  of  that darshan and  touch.   Others,  who 
have   the darshan and   touch   of Bhagvãn,   attain   only   the   seeds.  
However,  the  real  importance  applies  only  to  those  who  engage  in 
the darshan and touch, coupled with the mind.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur || 5 || 83 || 
 
 
Sãrangpur – 6 
Two States Within Each Of The Three Mental States 
The Four Types Of Speech 
 
6.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Shrãvan  vad 10  [2
nd
 September,  1820], 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on  the  veranda 
outside   the   north-facing  rooms  of  Jeevã  Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Sãrangpur.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of 
munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before Him. 
 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 235 - 
6.2
 Then, Nityãnand Swãmi asked, “How do the mental states remain 
within each of the other mental states?” 
 
6.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The ‘state’ is where the jeevãtmã dwells, 
when  it  indulges  in  the vishays.    There  are  three  types  of  mental 
states:  jãgrat, svapna, and sushupti. 
 
6.4
 “Of these, the jãgrat state  is  the  result  of  the  sustenance  state  of 
Virãt-Purush.  It is full of sattva-gun and is located in the region of the 
eyes.  In that jãgrat state, the jeevãtmã is known as vishva.  Moreover, 
with  the consciousness of  its sthul body,  via  the  ten indriyas and  the 
four antah-karans, the jeevãtmã appropriately and carefully indulges 
in  the  pleasures  of  the  external vishays according  to  its past karmas.  
This is known as the jãgrat state, in which sattva-gun is predominant. 
 
6.5
 “Within the jãgrat state,  if  the jeevãtmã indulges  in  the  pleasures  of 
the external vishays inappropriately due to some misconception, then 
that  is  known  as  the svapna state  within  the jãgrat state.    In  the 
jãgrat state,  if  the jeevãtmã indulges  in  the  pleasures  of  the  external 
vishays irresponsibly,  due  to  grief  or  fatigue,  then  that  is  known  as 
sushupti within the jãgrat state. 
 
6.6
 “The svapna state is  the  result of  the  creation  state  of Hiranyagarbh.  
It is full of rajo-gun and is located in the region of the throat.  In that 
svapna state, the jeevãtmã is known as taijas.  With the consciousness 
of  its sukshma body,  via  the indriyas and antah-karans,  the jeevãtmã 
indulges  in  pleasurable  and  miserable vishays,  which  are  temporary, 
according  to  its  past karmas.    This  is  known  as  the svapna state,  in 
which rajo-gun in predominant. 
 
6.7
 “Within the svapna state,  if  the jeevãtmã knowingly  indulges  in  the 
pleasures  of  the  temporary vishays carefully  and  with  awareness, 
exactly  as  it  does  during  the jãgrat state,  then  that  is  known  as  the 
jãgrat state within the svapna state.  However, if in that svapna state 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 236 - 
the jeevãtmã,    due    to    sluggishness,    does    not    recognise    those 
temporary vishays which  it  experiences,  then  that  is  known  as  the 
sushupti state within the svapna state. 
 
6.8
 “The sushupti state is the result of the destruction state of ishvar.  It is 
full  of tamo-gun and  is  located  in  the  region  of  the  heart.    When  the 
jeev is in that sushupti state, the vruttis of the indriyas and the antah-
karan,  the  desires  for  the  pleasures  of  the vishays,  and  its  sense  of 
knower-ship  and  doer-ship,  all  become  merged  in  the kãran body.  
When  the jeevãtmã,  which  has  the  consciousness  of  its kãran body, 
and is known as prãgna, remains fully absorbed in the bliss of sagun 
brahm in  the  form  of Pradhãn-Purush,  it  is  known  as  the sushupti 
state, in which tamo-gun is predominant. 
 
6.9
 “Within the sushupti state, if a sense of doer-ship develops due to the 
impressions of a person’s karmas,  then  that  is  known  as  the svapna 
state within  the sushupti state.    Then,  opposing  realisation  of  that 
sense of doer-ship – which disrupts the bliss of sushupti on account of 
the  agony  of  the  pain  experienced  during jãgrat and svapna – is 
known as the jãgrat state within the sushupti state. 
 
6.10
 “In this way, the other two states reside within each individual state.  
Also,  that  which  gives  knowledge  of  these  distinctions  between  the 
states  to  the jeevãtmã,  and  who  gives  the jeev the  rewards  of  its 
karmas accordingly within those states, is known as turyapad, as the 
antaryãmi, as the drashtã, as Brahm, and also as Parbrahm.” 
 
6.11
 Again, Nityãnand Swãmi asked, “How should a person understand 
the   four   types   of   speech – ‘parã’, ‘pashyanti’, ‘madhyamã’,   and 
‘vaikhari’?” 
 
6.12
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “That is a vast, as well as an extremely subtle 
subject,  but  in  the  eleventh skandh of  the  Shreemad  Bhãgvat, Shree 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 237 - 
Krishna Bhagvãn explains  it  to Uddhavji.    Please  listen  as  I  explain it 
in brief. 
 
6.13
 “At the time of the first creation, after entering the thousand-petalled 
lotus  which  lies  on  the  head  of Virãt-Purush, Purushottam Bhagvãn 
produced the ancient divine sound – like the sound of  Akshar-Brahm.  
Then, via the sushumnã path, that divine sound pervaded the navel of 
Virãt-Purush.    Then,  along with mahã-prãn,  it  rose  upwards,  and 
caused Virãt-Purush’s  lotus-navel – which   was   previously   facing 
downwards – to   face   upwards.      In   this   way,   the   divine   sound 
produced  in  the  navel  of Virãt-Purush is  known  as the ‘parã’ speech.  
For  the  purpose  of  creating  the  Veds, Bhagvãn Himself  has  inspired 
that ‘parã’ speech.    Therefore,  it  is  like  a  seed.    That ‘parã’ speech  is 
like a stream of light, and is the cause of the ‘ardhamãtrã’. 
 
6.14
 “From there, the ‘parã’ speech  reached  the hruday-ãkãsh of Virãt-
Purush, where it was known by the name of ‘pashyanti’.  From there it 
reached  the  region  of  the  throat  and  became  known  by  the  name  of 
‘madhyamã’.    From  there,  it  reached  the  mouth  of Virãt-Purush and 
received the name of ‘vaikhari’.  It then became the form of pranav by 
becoming the three sounds of ‘A’, ‘U’, and ‘M’.  It then became the 
fifty-two  syllables,  and  took  the  form  the  four  Veds.    In  this  way,  a 
person should understand the four types of speech in Virãt-Purush – 
‘parã’, ‘pashyanti’, ‘madhyamã’, and ‘vaikhari’. 
 
6.15
 “Now, I shall describe these four types of speech which also dwell 
within the body of the jeev, so please listen.  That same Purushottam 
Bhagvãn resides  in  the jeev as antaryãmi.    He  is  independent,  yet 
interwoven  with  the  three  mental  states  of  the jeev.    That  same 
Bhagvãn assumes  an avatãr on  this  earth  for  the kalyãn of  the jeevs.  
At  that  time,  those jeevs  describe  the svarup of  that Bhagvãn as  well 
as  His dhãms,  qualities,  and  divine  powers.    They  describe  His divya 
charitras,  make  a  distinction  between ãtmã and  non-ãtmã,  and  also 
individually   explain   the   differences   between jeev, ishvar, mãyã, 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 238 - 
Brahm,  and Parbrahm.    Such speech  is  known  as ‘parã’.    Speech  that 
gives a complete explanation of mãyik worldly entities and vishays is 
known  as ‘vaikhari’.    Speech  that  gives  an  incomplete  explanation, 
and creates confusion of mãyik worldly entities and vishays, is known 
as ‘madhyamã’.    Finally,  speech  which  blindly  describes  those mãyik 
worldly  entities and vishays as  being  the  same,  and  which  cannot  be 
understood, is known as ‘pashyãnti’. 
 
6.16
 “In this way, the details of the four types of speech can be known in 
the jãgrat state of the jeev.  The details of those four types of speech 
in the svapna and sushupti states can only be known by a person who 
has mastered samãdhi – it cannot be known by others.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur || 6 || 84 || 
 
 
Sãrangpur – 7 
Naimishãranya Kshetra 
 
7.1
 In   the Samvat year   1877,   on   the   night   of Shrãvan   vad 11   [3
rd
 
September,   1820],   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  north-facing  rooms  of  Jeevã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Sãrangpur.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from various places, 
had gathered before Him. 
 
7.2
 In  the sabhã,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  had  requested  the  first skandh of  the 
Shreemad   Bhãgvat   Purãn   to   be   read.      During   the   reading,   the 
following  statement  was encountered: ‘Wherever the jagged edges of 
the  manomay  chakra  are  worn  away, that  place  should  be  known  as 
Naimishãranya Kshetra’.  Hearing  this,  Muktãnand  Swãmi  inquired, 
“Mahãrãj, what exactly is the manomay chakra,  and  what  should  a 
person understand its jagged edges to be?” 
 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 239 - 
7.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “A person should understand the mind to 
be  the manomay chakra,  and  the  ten indriyas to  be  its  jagged  edges.  
Wherever  those  jagged  edges  of  the  mind  (the indriyas)  wear  away 
and  become  blunt,  that  place  should  be  known  as Naimishãranya 
Kshetra.  Religious deeds (jap, tap, vrat, dhyãn, and pujã) commenced 
in   that   place   flourish   rapidly,   day   by   day.      Furthermore,   that 
Naimishãranya Kshetra should  be  known  to  be  wherever Bhagvãn’s 
ekãntik sant resides. 
 
7.4
 “When the jagged edges of the manomay chakra are  worn  away,  no 
affection  remains  towards  any  of  the panch-vishays.    Then,  even  if  a 
person  sees  a  beautiful  woman,  or  extremely  attractive  clothes,  or 
jewellery,  a  strong  hatred  develops  towards  them  deep  within  his 
mind.  However, the vruttis of indriyas would never cling to them. 
 
7.5
 “For example, when an extremely sharp arrow pierces and lodges 
into  its  target,  it  cannot  be  removed.    However,  if  that  same  arrow, 
with its tip removed so that only its shaft remains, were to be shot at 
a  wall,  it  would  rebound  and  fall  to  the  ground.    It  would  not 
penetrate  the  wall  like  the  sharp-tipped  arrow.    Similarly,  when  the 
jagged  edges  of  the manomay chakra (the indriyas)  are  worn  away, 
then  no  matter  how  appealing  the vishays may  be,  the vruttis of  the 
indriyas would  not  be  drawn  towards  them.    Instead,  they  would 
rebound like the blunt arrow-shaft.  When a person is able to behave 
in  this  way,  the  jagged  edges  of  the manomay chakra can  be  said  to 
have been worn away. 
 
7.6
 “So,  a  person  should  seek kalyãn wherever   he   sees   such   a 
Naimishãranya Kshetra in the form of the association of a sant, and he 
should remain there with an absolutely firm mind.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur || 7 || 85 || 
 
 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 240 - 
Sãrangpur – 8 
The Characteristics Of Irshyã 
 
8.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Shrãvan  vad 12  [4
th
 September,  1820], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  north-facing  rooms  of  Jeevã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Sãrangpur.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from various places, 
had gathered before Him. 
 
8.2
 Chaitanyãnand  Swãmi  then  asked,  “Mahãrãj,  what  are  the 
characteristics of irshyã?” 
 
8.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Irshyã develops from the mãn that a person 
holds within his heart.  In fact, krodh, matsar, and asuyã also arise out 
of mãn.    But  the  characteristic  of irshyã is  that  a  person  cannot 
tolerate  someone  greater  than  himself  being  honoured.    A  person 
who has such a nature should be known to have irshyã with his heart.  
Moreover, a person who has extreme irshyã cannot tolerate anyone’s 
greatness.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur || 8 || 86 || 
 
 
Sãrangpur – 9 
The Prevalence Of The Dharma Of The Yugs 
 
9.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Shrãvan  vad 13  [5
th
 September,  1820], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   walked   from   Sãrangpur   and 
arrived  at  Kundal  to  please  His haribhaktas.    There,  He  was  sitting 
facing  north  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the 
west-facing rooms of Amrã Patgar’s home.  He had tied a white pãgh 
around His head.  He had covered Himself with a white pachhedi, and 
was wearing a white survãl and white angarkhu.  A sabhã of munis, as 
well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 241 - 
9.2
 Muktãnand Swãmi then asked, “Mahãrãj, why do the dharmas of  the 
yugs prevail in a person’s heart?” 
  
9.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The dharmas of the yugs prevail because of 
the three gun.  When pure sattva-gun is prevalent, Satya-Yug prevails 
in  the  heart.    When rajo-gun is  prevalent, Tretã-Yug prevails  in  the 
heart.  When rajo-gun and tamo-gun are prevalent together, Dvãpar-
Yug prevails in the heart.  Finally, when tamo-gun alone is prevalent, 
Kali-Yug prevails in the heart.  In this way, the prevalence of the yugs 
is due to the gun.” 
 
9.4
 Muktãnand Swãmi asked further, “What causes the activities of the 
gun?” 
 
9.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The cause of the activities of the gun are 
karmas.    Specifically,  the  type  of karmas  a  person  has  performed 
previously,  determines  the gun that  will  prevail.  Therefore,  if  a 
person,  in  whom rajo-gun and tamo-gun are  prevalent,  attempts  to 
perform dhyãn on Bhagvãn,  he  will  not  be  able  to  do  so.    In  such 
situations,  he  should  make  use  of  the  strength  of ãtmã-nishthã and 
Bhagvãn’s greatness.    He  should  realise, ‘I am the ãtmã.  Since I am 
gunãtit, there can be no mãyik influence within me’.  Furthermore, he 
should realise Bhagvãn’s greatness in the following way:  ‘Ajãmel was 
a  terrible  sinner  and  yet,  because  of  his  son,  he  uttered  the  name  of 
“Nãrãyan”.  As a result,  he  was  freed  from  all  his  sins  and  attained 
Akshardhãm.    I  have  attained  that  Bhagvãn  in  His  pratyaksha  svarup, 
and I chant His holy name day and night.  Therefore, I am fulfilled’.  
Thinking in such a way, he should always remain joyful. 
 
9.6
 “However,  a  person  in  whom rajo-gun and tamo-gun are  prevalent 
should not insist on performing dhyãn.  Instead, he should engage in 
bhajan and smaran as   much   as   possible.      Moreover,   he   should 
physically  serve Bhagvãn and  His sant with shraddhã.    At  the  same 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 242 - 
time,  he  should  abide  by  his dharma and  believe  himself  to  be 
fulfilled.” 
9.7
  Again, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Kali-Yug prevails  in  the  heart  of  a 
person  who  has  accumulated  many tãmasi karmas.    Is  there  any 
method to eradicate those karmas, or not?” 
 
9.8
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “If he has intense shraddhã and extremely 
firm  faith  in  the  words  of Bhagvãn and  His sant,  then  whatever  type 
of tãmasi karmas he  may  have  performed,  they  will  be  destroyed.  
The dharma of Kali-Yug will also vanish, and the dharma of Satya-Yug 
will  prevail.    Therefore,  if  a  person  practices satsang with  absolute 
honesty,  then  no  fault  will  remain  in  his  heart,  and  he  will  become 
brahm-rup in this very lifetime.” 
 
9.9
 Then,  Svayamprakãshãnand  Swãmi  asked,  “What  can  be  called 
sthãn?” 
 
9.10
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “An individual’s dharma according  to  the 
four varnas and the four ãshrams should be known as sthãn.  You are 
all tyãgis,  but  if  you  were  to  leave  this ãshram and  tread  the  path  of 
grahasthas,  then  you  would  be  known  to  have diverted  from  your 
sthãn.   So, even  in  the most  difficult  circumstances,  or  even if I  were 
to   issue   an ãgnã,   you   should   not   deviate   from   your dharma.  
Moreover,  while grahasthas wish  to  perform  my pujã by  offering 
clothes  and  jewellery,  you  should  not  wish to  do  so.    Instead,  you 
should offer pujã by  using  leaves,  flowers, fruits,  and  water,  and  you 
should  experience  joy  by  performing  this pujã.    It  would  not  be 
appropriate  for  you  to  deviate  from  your dharma to  perform pujã of 
Bhagvãn.    Therefore,  all  of  you  should  remain  within  your  own 
dharma,  and  offer pujã within  your  capacity.    This  is  my ãgnã,  so 
abide by it firmly.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur || 9 || 87 || 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 243 - 
Sãrangpur – 10 
Dharma And Adharma 
 
10.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Shrãvan  vad 14  [6
th
 September,  1820], 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  walking  with  all  the sãdhus  from  Kundal  and, 
along  the  way,  they  arrived  at  Khãmbhdã.    They  settled  themselves 
under   a   pipal   tree.      The   people   of   the   village   then   brought   a 
decorated bedstead for Shreeji Mahãrãj to sit upon.  He was dressed 
entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of sãdhus,  as  well  as haribhaktas 
from  various  places,  had  gathered  before  Him.    Some  of  the sãdhus 
were singing kirtans. 
 
10.2
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then asked the sãdhus to stop singing, and addressed 
the village people, “In this world there are two types of people:  
Those  who  follow  the  path  of  honesty  (dharma)  and  those  who 
follow  the  path  of  sin  (adharma).    Of  these,  the  person  who  follows 
the path of honesty, abandons stealing, adultery, slander and all other 
forms  of  sin.    Fearing Bhagvãn,  such  a  person  remains  within  the 
disciplines of dharma.  As a result, everyone in the world trusts him, 
be it a member of his family or anyone else; and whatever he says is 
accepted by all as the truth.  A person who follows dharma, likes the 
company of a true sant. 
 
10.3
 “On the other hand, a person who follows the path of sin(adharma), 
is  engrossed  in  evil  deeds  such  as  stealing,  adultery,  eating  meat, 
drinking alcohol, changing someone’s varna and ãshram by force, and 
having  his  own varna and ãshram changed  by  force.    As  a  result,  no 
one  in  the  world  ever  trusts  him.    In  fact,  even  his  own  relatives  do 
not trust him.  Such a sinful person never likes the company of a true 
sant;  and  if  someone  else  were  to  keep  the  company  of  a sant,  the 
sinful person would spite him too. 
 
10.4
 “Therefore, a person who aims to attain kalyãn, should not follow the 
path of sin (adharma).  Instead, he should follow the path of honesty 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 244 - 
(dharma),  and  keep  the  company  of  a  true sãdhu.   As  a  result,  he 
would certainly, without a doubt, attain kalyãn.” 
 
10.5
 Hearing  this  talk,  many  people  of  the  village  accepted  the  refuge  of 
Shreeji Mahãrãj.   
 
10.6
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  returned  to  Sãrangpur,  and  sat  on  a  decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda outside  the  north-facing  rooms  of  Jeevã 
Khãchar’s darbãr.  He was dressed entirely in white clothes.  A sabhã 
of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before Him. 
 
10.7
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “If a person looks at the dhãms of Bhagvãn 
– Golok, Vaikunth, Shvet-Dvip, Brahmpur – from    a    physical 
perspective,  they  appear  to  be  very  far  away.    However,  if  a  person 
looks  at  them  from  the ãtmã’s perspective,  they  are  not  even  an 
atom’s distance away.  Therefore, the understanding of a person who 
views from a physical perspective is false, and the understanding of a 
person who views from the perspective of the ãtmã is true.  In reality, 
Bhagvãn and  the dhãm of Bhagvãn are not even an atom’s distance 
away  from  a sãdhu who  believes, ‘Bhagvãn  is  forever  present  in  my 
chaitanya.  Just like the jeev resides in the body, Bhagvãn resides within 
my jeev.  My jeev is the sharir, and Bhagvãn is the shariri of my jeev’.  
Such a sãdhu also believes that his jeevãtmã is distinct from the three 
bodies – sthul, sukshma,  and kãran – and  that Bhagvãn forever 
resides  within  his ãtmã.    Such  a sant is  like  a mukta of Shvet-Dvip.  
When  a  person  has  the darshan of  such  a sant,  he  should  realise, ‘I 
have had the darshan of Bhagvãn Himself’.  A person who has such an 
understanding has nothing more to attain. 
 
10.8
 “If a person is unable to attain such an understanding, then he should 
maintain profound associations with a sant.  If that sant were to daily 
beat him five times with a pair of shoes, he should still tolerate such 
insults.  In no way should he abandon his association with a sant, just 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 245 - 
as  an  opium  addict  cannot  abandon  his  addiction.    Such  a  person 
should  be  known  to  be  equal  to  the sant mentioned  earlier.    Also, 
whatever  that sant attains,  a  person  who  continues  to  profoundly 
associate with such a sant, also attains.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur || 10 || 88 || 
 
 
Sãrangpur – 11 
Personal Effort 
 
11.1
 In the Samvat year 1877, on Shrãvan vad Amãs [7
th
 September, 1820], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  north-facing  rooms  of  Jeevã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Sãrangpur.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from various places, 
had gathered before Him. 
 
11.2
 Then,  Muktãnand  Swãmi  asked  a  question:  “Personal  effort  is 
mentioned  in  the shãstras,  but  how  much  is  actually  achieved  by 
personal effort, and how much is achieved by Bhagvãn’s grace?” 
 
11.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “A person who, by the words of a sadguru 
and  the shãstras,  has  attained  firm vairãgya,  has  firm shraddhã, 
strictly   follows   the   eight   types   of brahm-chãrya,   has   affection 
towards ahinsã, and absolutely firmly realises himself to be the ãtmã, 
is  relieved  of  the  burden  of  births  and  deaths  which  hangs  over  his 
head.    Then,  just  like  a  grain  of  rice  that  has  had  its  outer  chaff 
removed does not grow, a mukta who has the gun just mentioned, is 
freed  from  eternal  ignorance  in  the  form  of mãyã.  He  is  therefore 
freed  from  the  cycle  of  births  and  deaths,  and  attains  the  state  of 
ãtmã-nishthã.  This much can be achieved by personal effort. 
 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 246 - 
11.4
 “Bhagvãn’s grace  is  only  bestowed  upon  a  person  who  has  these 
characteristics.    When  he  attains  the  grace  of Bhagvãn,  he  becomes 
an ekãntik bhakta.  Even the Shrutis state: 
 
niranjanaha paramam sãmyam-upaiti 
 
“The meaning of this Vedic shlok is that a person who is free from the 
blemishes of mãyã, attains qualities similar to those of Bhagvãn.  Just 
as Bhagvãn is  never  bound  by  any  pure  or  impure karmas  that  He 
may  perform,  the mukta is  also  never  bound  by  pure  or  impure 
karmas. 
 
11.5
 “Due  to  her  love, Lakshmiji sometimes   becomes   absorbed   in 
Bhagvãn’s murti,   whereas   on   other   occasions,   while   remaining 
separate  from Bhagvãn,  she  remains  in Bhagvãn’s sevã.    In  the  same 
way,   out   of   intense   love,   the bhakta also   sometimes   becomes 
absorbed in Bhagvãn,  and  at  other  times  he  is  separate  and  remains 
in Bhagvãn’s sevã.    Moreover,  just  as Bhagvãn is  independent,  that 
bhakta also   becomes   independent.      These   powers   can   only   be 
attained by the grace of Bhagvãn.” 
 
11.6
 Then, Nityãnand Swãmi asked, “Bhagvãn’s grace  is  bestowed  upon  a 
person  who  has  absorbed  all  these  characteristics  perfectly.    But, 
what  becomes  of  a  person  who  has  some  deficiency  in  developing 
these characteristics?” 
 
11.7
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If a person has a deficiency in any of the 
qualities  of vairãgya, brahm-chãrya, shraddhã, ahinsã,  and ãtmã-
nishthã,   then   he   does   not   attain ãtyantik moksh,   and Bhagvãn’s 
Akshardhãm.  Instead, he attains some other dhãm of Bhagvãn.  If he 
has  even  more  worldly  desires  remaining,  he  attains  the loks of  the 
devs.    In  the Moksh-Dharma,  these loks are  described  as  being  like 
Narak compared to the dhãm of Bhagvãn.  Then, after being a dev, he 
returns to being a human, and from being a human he again becomes 
a dev. 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 247 - 
anek-janma-sansiddh-stato yãti parãm gatim 
A yogi who has become siddh after many lives, attains Akshardhãm. 
 
“This shlok explains  that  a bhakta of Bhagvãn who  has  worldly 
desires does not go to Narak, nor does he have to undergo births and 
deaths   in   the   cycle   of   8.4   million   life-forms.      Instead,   he   takes 
innumerable births as a dev and a human being.  Then, only when he 
develops   the   previously   described   qualities   of vairãgya, brahm-
chãrya, shraddhã, ahinsã,  and ãtmã-nishthã,  does  he  become  worthy 
of  attaining  the  grace  of Bhagvãn.    He  then  becomes  an ekãntik 
bhakta of Bhagvãn, and attains His gunãtit dhãm, Akshardhãm. 
 
11.8
 “So, whether it takes one life or innumerable lives, only when a 
person    develops    the    previously    described    characteristics    and 
becomes  extremely  free  of  worldly  desires,  does  he  become  worthy 
of  attaining  the  grace  of Bhagvãn,  and  only  then  will  he  attain 
ãtyantik moksh.  Without it, he will definitely not attain it.” 
 
11.9
 Then, Nrusinhãnand Swãmi asked, “Is there a method by which a 
person can eradicate all of his deficiencies within this very lifetime?” 
 
11.10
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If a person becomes extremely vigilant and 
determined,  then all  of  his  deficiencies can  be  eradicated  within  this 
very lifetime.  If his deficiencies have not been eradicated while he is 
alive,  and  if  he  were  to  become  free  of  worldly  desires and  develop 
intense love for Bhagvãn during his last moments, then even in those 
last  moments Bhagvãn would  shower  His  grace  upon  him,  and  he 
would attain the dhãm of Bhagvãn. 
 
11.11
 “Therefore, whether after one life, or after countless lives, or even in 
the  last  moments  before  a  person  dies,  should  a bhakta’s vruttis 
become intensely focused on Bhagvãn, no deficiency would remain in 
that bhakta.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur || 11 || 89 || 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 248 - 
Sãrangpur – 12 
Thinking About The Ãtmã 
 
12.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Bhãdarvã  sud 1  [8
th
 September,  1820], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  north-facing  rooms  of  Jeevã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Sãrangpur.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from various places, 
had gathered before Him. 
 
12.2
 Then,  Nirvikãrãnand  Swãmi  asked  a  question:  “Which  qualities 
constantly remain in a sãdhu, and which qualities come and go?” 
 
12.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “First, there is ãtmã-nishthã; second, there is 
svadharma;  and  third,  there  is nishchay in  the svarup of Bhagvãn.  
These  three  qualities  constantly  remain  in  a sãdhu,  whereas  others 
may come and may go.  Therefore, while other qualities come and go, 
these three qualities will always remain.” 
 
12.4
 Then,  Muktãnand  Swãmi  asked,  “Why  is  it  that  even  after 
understanding  the  distinction  between  the  body  and  the ãtmã,  a 
person forgets that distinction, and continues to identify himself with 
the body?” 
 
12.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “Once a person has clearly understood the 
distinction  between  the  body  and  the ãtmã,  it  cannot  be  forgotten.  
Even if he believes, ‘I am the body’, he can no longer accept himself as 
the body.  Also, once he has firmly established the belief of Bhagvãn, 
even  if  he  tries  to  reject  it,  it  cannot  be  rejected.    Furthermore,  the 
belief that his understanding of ‘I am an ãtmã’ has been lost, and the 
belief   that ‘I  am  the  body’ has   begun   to   prevail,   is   simply   a 
misconception of his mind.  The belief never actually returns.  Such a 
bhakta with  perfect gnãn is  conscious  only  of  his ãtmã.    Also,  he 
believes  his ãtmã to  be brahm-rup,  and  that Purushottam Bhagvãn, 
who   is Parbrahm,   forever   resides   in   that brahm-rup ãtmã.      In 
addition to this, his belief of Bhagvãn remains forever steady.” 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 249 - 
12.6
 Then, Svayamprakãshãnand Swãmi asked, “How should a person 
think of his ãtmã?” 
 
12.7
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “When the drashtã (the jeevãtmã) focuses on 
the antah-karan, it becomes unaware of the outer sthul body, and all 
the vishays related  to  it.    Then,  with  the  thought  that  rests  between 
the antah-karan and  the drashtã,  a  person  should  realise  the  nature 
of  the man,  the buddhi,  the chitt,  and  the ahankãr.    A  person  should 
then  observe  the  various  immoral  thoughts  within  the antah-karan.  
Then,   only   when   those   immoral   thoughts   end,   should   a   person 
perform dhyãn on Bhagvãn’s murti.    However,  as  long  as  those 
immoral   thoughts   and   desires   persist,   a   person   should   keep 
observing them, but he should not perform dhyãn at that time. 
 
12.8
 “In addition, when the five gnãn-indriyas of  the  outer sthul body  are 
drawn towards their respective vishays, a person should think in two 
ways:    Firstly,  he  should  think  about  the vishay towards  which  the 
indriyas have  been  drawn.    Secondly,  he  should  think  about  the 
drashtã who  watches  from  the organ  of  the indriya.    Then,  when  the 
first  thought  of  the vishay and  the  second  thought  of  the drashtã 
merge  into  one,  his vrutti becomes  completely  detached  from  the 
vishays.    However,  if  he  does  not  think  in  this  way  and  attempts  to 
break his vrutti from the vishays forcefully, then the vrutti’s attraction 
towards  the vishays will  not  be  eradicated.    On  the  other  hand,  if  he 
withdraws  his vrutti by  applying  this  thought  process,  his vrutti will 
never again become attached to the vishays.  Therefore, as long as the 
vruttis of a person’s indriyas have affection for the vishays, he should 
avoid  performing dhyãn of Bhagvãn.    Only  when  the vruttis of the 
indriyas become stable should he perform the dhyãn of Bhagvãn. 
 
12.9
 “Also, when the drashtã is  active  in  the  outer sthul body,  a  person 
should  be  absolutely  clear  in  making  the  distinction  that  when  he  is 
active  in  the sthul body,  he  should  never  look towards  the  desires 
arising  in  the sukshma body;    and  when  a  person  is  active  in  the 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 250 - 
antah-karan, he should become unaware of his sthul body.  Moreover, 
using  the  thought  which  rests  between  the drashtã and drashya,  he 
should realise, ‘The drashtã and drashya are absolutely distinct’.  With 
this  understanding,  a  person  should  assign  the  features  of  the  body, 
to  the  body,  and  the  features  of  the drashtã,  which  is chaitanya,  to 
chaitanya.    Also,  childhood,  youth,  old  age,  fatness,  thinness,  birth, 
and  death, are  all  aspects  of  the  body.    Therefore,  they  should  never 
be  thought  of  as  belonging  to  the ãtmã.    On  the  other  hand,  being 
achhedhya, abhedhya,  not  aging,  immortal,  full  of gnãn,  blissful,  and 
eternal,  are  all  aspects  of  the ãtmã.    They  should  in  no  way be 
considered  to  belong  to  the  body.    Instead,  those  characteristics 
should be understood to belong to the ãtmã. 
 
12.10
 “These thoughts should not be abandoned as long as desires and 
immoral thoughts persist in the antah-karan.   Take the example of a 
king:  As long as he is confronted by an enemy, he cannot preside on 
his throne in peace, nor does he indulge in any pleasures.  Only when 
all  of  his  enemies  are  conquered,  does  he  enjoy  the  luxuries  of  his 
kingdom.    Similarly,  a bhakta of Bhagvãn should  firmly  keep  these 
thoughts, as long as the enemies (his mind and indriyas) continue to 
trouble him.  Only when all the desires of his mind and indriyas have 
diminished, should he perform dhyãn of Bhagvãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur || 12 || 90 || 
 
 
Sãrangpur – 13 
Losing Nishchay And Not Losing Nishchay 
 
13.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Bhãdarvã  sud 2  [9
th
 September,  1820], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  north-facing  rooms  of  Jeevã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Sãrangpur.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from various places, 
had gathered before Him. 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 251 - 
13.2
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Can a person who previously had 
nishchay in Bhagvãn,  but  later  lost  it,  really  be  said  to  have  had 
nishchay in the first place?” 
 
13.3
 Svayamprakãshãnand  Swãmi  replied,  “If  a  person  has  developed 
nishchay in   his jeevãtmã,   he   would   not   lose   it   by   any   means.  
However, if his nishchay is based on the writings in the shãstras, then 
when Bhagvãn performs  some  action  that  is  not  mentioned  in  the 
shãstras, he would lose his nishchay in Bhagvãn.” 
 
13.4
 “Hearing this, Shreeji Mahãrãj then said,  “In the shãstras,  there  are 
an  endless  variety  of  talks  describing Bhagvãn as  being powerful  as 
well  as  weak,  as  being  the  all-doer  as  well  as  a  non-doer.    So  then, 
which  action  not  mentioned  in  the shãstras could Bhagvãn possibly 
have  performed,  which  causes  a  person  to  lose  his nishchay?    Please 
answer this question.” 
 
13.5
 The munis replied, “No action of Bhagvãn is outside the shãstras.  So, 
what  is  the  reason  behind  a  person  developing nishchay and  then 
losing it?” 
 
13.6
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “It is only through the shãstras that  a 
person  develops nischay.  This  is  because  the shãstras describe  the 
characteristics of Bhagvãn as well as the characteristics of a sant.  So, 
only nishchay developed  through  the shãstras remains  firm.    On  the 
other hand, nishchay developed by a person’s own mind, without the 
help of the shãstras, eventually dissolves. 
 
13.7
 “The shãstras are also the inspiration behind the activities of dharma.  
The  fact  that  an  ignorant  person,  who  has  never  heard  the shãstras, 
has  been  able  to  follow  the  disciplines  of dharma to  this  day,  in  the 
form  of  making  distinctions  between  his  mother,  sister,  daughter, 
and  other  women,  is  due  to  the shãstras.    How  is  that?    Well,  it  has 
been  passed  down  through  the  generations  after  someone  initially 
heard   the   talks   from   the shãstras.      From   that,   it   has   spread 
throughout  society  through  successive  generations.    Therefore,  a 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 252 - 
person who develops nishchay in Bhagvãn and loses it afterwards has 
no nishchay in  the  words  of  the shãstras.    Such  a  person  is  stubborn 
and a nãstik. 
 
13.8
 “On the other hand, if a person does have nishchay in the shãstras, he 
would  never  turn  away  from Bhagvãn.    This  is  because  the shãstras 
describe an endless variety of charitras of Bhagvãn.  So, regardless of 
which  actions Bhagvãn performs,  it  will  never  be  outside  of  the 
shãstras.  Therefore, only a person who has nishchay in the shãstras is 
able  to  develop  unshakeable nishchay in Bhagvãn,  and  only  such  a 
person  attains kalyãn.    In  addition,  such  a  person  would  never 
deviate from dharma.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur || 13 || 91 || 
 
 
Sãrangpur – 14 
Laziness And Infatuation 
 
14.1
 In the Samvat year 1877, on Bhãdarvã sud 3 [10
th
 September, 1820], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  facing  west  on  a 
decorated   bedstead   on   the   veranda   outside   the   rooms   of   Jeevã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Sãrangpur.    He was  wearing  a  black-bordered, 
white khes,  and  had  covered  Himself  with  a  white chãdar.    He  had 
also  tied  a  white pãgh around  His  head.    Bunches  of  yellow  flowers 
were  placed  above  His  ears,  and  tassels  of  yellows flowers  had  been 
placed upon His pãgh.  In addition to this, a garland of yellow flowers 
was  hanging  from  His  neck  down  to  His  navel.    A sabhã of munis,  as 
well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
14.2
 Svayamprakãshãnand Swãmi then asked a question: “It is said in the 
Geetã  that  once  a bhakta attains  the dhãm of Bhagvãn,  such  as 
Vaikunth, he never falls back from it.  But, which flaw causes some to 
fall back?” 
 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 253 - 
14.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj asked in return, “Who has attained the dhãm of 
Bhagvãn and then fallen back?  Give me even one example!” 
 
14.4
  Svayamprakãshãnand Swãmi replied, “First of all, there are Jay and 
Vijay,  the pãrshads of Bhagvãn who  fell  from Vaikunth.    Then,  there 
are Radhikãji and Shreedãmã, who fell from Golok.” 
 
14.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then clarified, “Jay and Vijay did fall, but it was only 
because Bhagvãn wanted  to  illustrate  the  glory  of  a sãdhu.    If  a 
person  insults  a sãdhu,  like  the Sanakãdik,  then  even  if  he  has 
attained  a dhãm like Vaikunth,  he  can  still  fall  from it.    That  is  why 
they  fell.    In  addition,  Jay  and  Vijay  did  return  to Bhagvãn’s dhãm, 
Vaikunth,  in  their  third  life.    Therefore,  they  cannot  be  said  to  have 
fallen;  it  happened  because  it  was Bhagvãn’s wish.    In  any  case,  a 
person  can  only  be  said  to  have fallen  when  he  never  again  retains 
any contact with Bhagvãn. 
 
14.6
 “Also, when Rãdhikãji fell from Golok, that too was by Bhagvãn’s wish, 
as   He   Himself   wished   to   incarnate   in   a   human   body   to   uplift 
countless jeevs   and   perform kalyãn-kãri actions.      Therefore,   if 
someone  claims  that Rãdhikãji fell,  then Bhagvãn could  be  said  to 
have  fallen  along  with  her.    That  is  why  she  cannot  be  said  to  have 
fallen,  because  it  was Bhagvãn’s wish  that  they  both  came  to  earth 
from Golok.  So, in this instance, it should be recognised as being the 
wish of Bhagvãn only. 
 
14.7
 “Of course, if it is His wish, a mukta may  incarnate  in  a  body  even 
from Akshardhãm.    Moreover,  by  His  will,  that  which  is jad can 
become chaitanya, and that which is chaitanya can become jad.  After 
all, Bhagvãn is extremely powerful,  and  whatever He  wishes,  occurs.  
Therefore,  no  one  who  has  attained  the dhãm of Bhagvãn falls  back 
from it without it being Bhagvãn’s wish.  However, a person who does 
fall, is a worldly incomplete bhakta, who falls during the course of his 
spiritual activities.  Such a person is called ‘yog-bhrasht’.  In contrast, 
those who have become siddh through vairãgya, ãtmã-nishthã, bhakti 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 254 - 
towards Bhagvãn,  and brahm-chãrya,  are  equal  to  the muktas of 
Shvet-Dvip.  They never fall.” 
 
14.8
 Having  explained  this,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “Now,  I  shall  ask  a 
question.” 
 
14.9
 The munis responded, “Please do ask.” 
 
14.10
 Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “In the Udyog-Parva  of  the  Mahãbhãrat,  Sanat-
Sujãt Rushi says to Dhrutrãshtra, ‘He who abandons both laziness and 
infatuation has completely disobeyed Bhagvãn’s mãyã.  In fact, laziness 
and infatuation are mãyã itself’.  Now,  we  are  known  to  be tyãgi 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn.      If   someone   amongst   us   has   laziness   and 
infatuation,   and   if   that   person   is   not   particularly   vigilant   in 
eradicating them by using the strength of Bhagvãn’s glory, then what 
type of bliss does such a bhakta experience in this body?  Also, what 
type of bliss does he attain after he dies?  That is my question.” 
 
14.11
 Svayamprakãshãnand  Swãmi replied, “A person who is a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn need not worry too much if his laziness and infatuation are 
not eradicated by the deep thought of Bhagvãn’s glory.” 
 
14.12
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then questioned, “What is wrong with a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn who has laziness and infatuation and is vigilant in his efforts 
to  eradicate  them?    What  makes  a  person  who  is  not  so  vigilant 
better than the person who is?” 
 
14.13
 Svayamprakãshãnand  Swãmi  explained, “That bhakta of Bhagvãn 
relies on the strength of Bhagvãn, not on the strength of his spiritual 
activities.  That is why he is better.” 
 
14.14
 Shreeji Mahãrãj questioned further, “You are claiming that a person 
who is careless, despite the enemies of laziness and infatuation being 
prevalent  in  him,  is  superior.    Well,  consider  the  example  of  a pati-
vratã wife.  Due to the fear of her husband, and the fear of preserving 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 255 - 
her pati-vratã  dharma,  she  remains  very  conscious  in  her  mind,  in 
case  she  smiles  at  or  touches  another  man.    Moreover,  in  her  mind 
lies the following fear:  ‘If I behave freely, my husband will think of me 
as  an  adulteress,  and  will  no  longer  accept  my  sevã.    This  would  be  a 
breach  of  my  pati-vratã dharma’.  Bearing  this  in  mind,  she  remains 
ever  vigilant.    So,  you  are  claiming  that  a bhakta who  keeps bhakti 
just  like  the pati-vratã wife  and  who  is  conscious  in  his  efforts  to 
eradicate  laziness  and  infatuation  is  at  fault.    Furthermore,  you  are 
suggesting  that  a bhakta who  is  not  concerned  about  eradicating 
laziness  and  infatuation,  like  a  woman  who  flirts  with  any  man  she 
fancies, and is not concerned about preserving her fidelity, is actually 
superior!    Is  this  because  of  a  misunderstanding  on  your  behalf,  or 
what? 
  
14.15
 “Remember, if a person remains careless, then even if he is a bhakta 
of Bhagvãn,  the  two  enemies  of  laziness  and  infatuation  would  not 
fail  to  hinder  him.    For  example,  when  a  person  drinks  alcohol  or 
bhãng, then   just   as   a vimukh becomes   intoxicated,   a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn would  also  become  intoxicated  and  delirious.    In  the  same 
way, just as alcohol and bhãng in the form of laziness and infatuation 
affect a vimukh, they affect a bhakta of Bhagvãn as well.  However, the 
only  difference  between  a vimukh and  a bhakta of Bhagvãn is  that  a 
vimukh cannot  eradicate  these  two  enemies,  whereas  a bhakta can 
overcome  them  if  he  remains  vigilant  in  his  efforts.    That  is  the 
advantage a bhakta of Bhagvãn has.  Nevertheless, he is not better if 
he remains careless, even if he is a bhakta of Bhagvãn.” 
 
14.16
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked another question:  “How many elements 
is   the sthul body   composed  of,   and   how   many   elements   is   the 
sukshma body  composed  of?    Are  there  equal  elements  in  both,  or 
does  one  have  more  or  less  than  the  other?    Please  describe  the 
nature of these two bodies.” 
 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 256 - 
14.17
 Svayamprakãshãnand  Swãmi  attempted  to  answer  the  question,  but 
was  unable  to  do  so  adequately.    Then,  all  the munis said, “Mahãrãj, 
please be kind enough to answer this question yourself.” 
 
14.18
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then explained, “The sthul body  is  composed  of  the 
five tattvas known  as  the  five mahã-bhuts,  such  as pruthvi and jal.  
The sukshma body  is  composed  of  nineteen tattvas:    the  five gnãn-
indriyas,  the  five karma-indriyas,  the  five prãns,  and  the  four antah-
karans.    Yet,  only  when  the sukshma body  is  interwoven  with  the 
sthul body,   can   all   activities   be   carried   out   properly,   but   not 
otherwise.    This  is  because  only  when  the sukshma body,  together 
with the indriyas, joins the sthul body – which includes the organs of 
the indriyas,  such  as  the  eyes  and  ears – can  the vishays of  those 
indriyas be  indulged  in.    This  is  not  possible  by  the  organs  of  the 
indriyas of   the sthul body   alone.      Therefore,   the sukshma body 
composed  of  the  nineteen tattvas is  interwoven  with  the sthul body 
composed of the five tattvas (five mahã-bhuts).  That is why the sthul 
body is also said to be composed of twenty-four tattvas. 
 
14.19
 “In the same way, the pleasures  of  the sukshma body  can  only  be 
indulged  in  when  the sukshma body  behaves  as  one  with  the sthul 
body, which is composed of the five tattvas.  That is why the sukshma 
body,  which  is  composed  of  nineteen tattvas,  is  also  said  to  be 
composed  of  twenty-four tattvas.    Moreover,  because  the sthul body 
is inherent within the sukshma body, when a person associates with a 
woman through his sukshma body, he ejaculates semen from his sthul 
body.    Therefore,  there  is  unity  between  the sthul body  and  the 
sukshma body during the jãgrat state and the svapna state.” 
 
14.20
 Then,  the munis remarked, “Mahãrãj, this suggests that the sukshma 
body  is  the  same  as  the sthul body.    So,  just  as  there  is  an  effect  of 
karmas  on  the sthul body,  is  there  a  similar  effect  on  the sukshma 
body as well?  Or is there a difference?” 
 
14.21
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If a person has just as strong a belief that 
the sukshma body is ‘mine’, as he has that this sthul body is ‘mine’, 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 257 - 
then  the  law  of karmas  would  apply  to  the sukshma body  just  as  it 
does to the sthul body.  Indeed, it is only to encourage the individual 
that   the karmas   of   the sukshma body   have   been   said   to   be 
insignificant. 
 
14.22
 “In comparison, neither the sthul body  nor  the sukshma body  of  a 
person who has no consciousness of his sthul and sukshma bodies, is 
affected  by karmas.    This  is  because  such  a  person  behaves  only  as 
the ãtmã.    Therefore,  a  person  who  has  such ãtmã-nishthã,  remains 
unaffected   by karmas   related   to   the sthul and sukshma bodies.  
Nonetheless,  such  a  person  would  never  physically  perform  any 
impure karmas.    Furthermore,  he  endures  any  joy  or  pain  resulting 
from his prãrabdha.  Even while experiencing them, he believes, ‘I am 
not the one who experiences.  I am the ãtmã’. 
 
14.23
 “On the other hand, a person who  is  ignorant  and  who  perceives 
himself  with  the  body,  is  affected  by  all karmas  related  to  the sthul 
and sukshma bodies,  and  therefore  he  experiences  joy  and  pain 
according  to  his karmas.    This  is  because  an  ignorant  person,  while 
experiencing  whichever vishays he  indulges  in,  believes  the  body  to 
be  his  true svarup,  and  feels, ‘I am the one who experiences these 
vishays’. 
 
14.24
 “Then, in his final moments, such an ignorant person sees yamduts.  
He   then   becomes   unaware   of   his   body   and   enters   a   state   of 
unconsciousness.    The yamduts force  him  to  leave  his  body  and 
therefore separate his jeev.  The jeev then receives the body of an evil 
spirit,  in  which  it  suffers the  torments  of Yampuri.  In  comparison,  a 
bhakta of Bhagvãn possessing gnãn,  sees Bhagvãn or  His sant in  his 
last  moments.    He  also  becomes  unaware  of  his  body  and  enters  a 
state  of  unconsciousness.    However,  when  that bhakta discards  his 
body and becomes separate from it, Bhagvãn grants him a divya body 
like that of Bhagvãn, with which he resides in the dhãm of Bhagvãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur || 14 || 92 || 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 258 - 
Sãrangpur – 15 
Mugdhã, Madhyã, And Praudhã Gopis 
 
15.1
 In the Samvat year 1877, on Bhãdarvã sud 4 [11
th
 September, 1820], 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on  the  veranda 
outside the rooms of Jeevã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Sãrangpur.    He  was 
dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
15.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “I shall ask a question.  There are two 
types  of bhaktas of Bhagvãn:    A  person  has  such  deep  love  for 
Bhagvãn that he cannot bear even a second without His darshan.  His 
love   is   very   obviously   noticeable.      Another bhakta of Bhagvãn 
possesses  knowledge  of  the ãtmã as  well  as  total vairãgya.    He  also 
has love for Bhagvãn, but his love does not appear to be like the love 
of the first bhakta.  Furthermore, although the first bhakta’s bhakti is 
extremely  appealing,  he  possesses  neither  knowledge  of  the ãtmã 
and vairãgya,  but  his bhakti is  not  as  appealing  as  the  first bhakta’s.  
Of  these  two bhaktas,  whose bhakti is  superior,  and  whose bhakti is 
inferior?  That is the question.” 
 
15.3
 To  this,  Svayamprakãshãnand Swãmi replied, “He who has intense 
love for Bhagvãn is better, even if he does not have knowledge of the 
ãtmã and vairãgya.” 
 
15.4
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then questioned, “With what understanding do you 
say that he who does not have knowledge of the ãtmã and vairãgya is 
better?    Such  a  person  believes  himself  to  be  the  body,  and  so 
whenever  he  comes  upon  any  of  the panch-vishays that  comfort  his 
body,  he  will  develop  affection  for  them.    As  a  result,  his  love  for 
Bhagvãn will diminish.  So why do you consider him to be superior?” 
 
15.5
 Svayamprakãshãnand Swãmi clarified, “I do not consider the person 
who  develops  affection  for  the vishays to  be  a bhakta who  loves 
Bhagvãn.    Instead,  I  consider  the  person  who  is  like  the gopis to  be 
such a bhakta.” 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 259 - 
15.6
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “The gopis were not so naïve.  They 
were  so  wise  that  their  wisdom  could  go  beyond  the  understanding 
of  those  who  do  possess knowledge  of  the ãtmã and vairãgya.    They 
also  spoke  as  expressively  as  those  who  are  educated  in diplomacy.  
In  addition,  they  knew Bhagvãn precisely  as  He  should  be  known.  
Even  Uddhavji,  the  wisest  of  the Yãdavs and Bhagvãn’s adviser, 
became  overwhelmed  when  he  realised  the gopis’ understanding.  
That same Uddhavji later said, ‘Bhagvãn has shown great mercy to me 
by sending me to impart gnãn to the gopis’.  He  had  actually  gone  to 
preach   to   the gopis,   but   upon   hearing   their   words,   he   himself 
absorbed in the preaching of the gopis. 
 
15.7
 “Though you may say that the gopis were  not  very  intelligent,  there 
were   three   distinctions   amongst   them: mugdhã, madhyã,   and 
praudhã. 
 
15.8
 “Of these, the characteristics of the mugdhã gopis are  as  follows:  
They  would  often  lecture Bhagvãn and  say, ‘We have gone out of our 
way  doing things  for  you, yet  you  do  not  take  even  the  slightest  notice 
of us’.  Furthermore, if they were teased further, they would be upset 
with Bhagvãn, and speak such harsh words that a person would feel 
they  will  soon  fall  from  the  path  of Bhagvãn.    The gopis who  are 
described  in  this  way  in  the shãstras,  should  be  known  as mugdhã 
gopis. 
 
15.9
 “Those  who  are madhyã gopis,  would  never  become  angry  with 
Bhagvãn and  would  never  speak  such  harsh  words.    However,  by 
using  their shrewdness,  they  would  use  cunning  methods  to conceal 
their selfishness from others and do whatever they please while also 
doing whatever pleases Bhagvãn.  Therefore, they would not do only 
that  which  pleases Bhagvãn.    Furthermore,  even  if  they  have  to  do 
something  that  pleases  only Bhagvãn,  they  would  definitely  use  a 
cunning method  to  do  whatever  pleases  themselves  as  well.    The 
gopis, who are described in this way in the shãstras, should be known 
as madhyã gopis. 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 260 - 
15.10
 “In comparison, praudhã gopis would  do  only  that  which  pleases 
Bhagvãn.    In  no  way  would  they  use  any  cunning  methods  to  satisfy 
their  selfishness.    Their  only  wish  would  be  to  please Bhagvãn.  
Therefore, they remain happy with whatever pleases Bhagvãn.  Also, 
they would never become angry at, or jealous of the other gopis who 
are equal to them.  They would also abandon vicious natures, such as 
mãn and matsar,  and  remain  alert  in  the sevã of Bhagvãn.    They 
would  never  do  anything  by  thought,  word,  or  deed  that  would 
displease Bhagvãn.    The gopis who  are  described  in  this  way in  the 
shãstras,  should  be  known  as praudhã gopis.    In  this  way,  there  are 
three distinctions amongst the gopis. 
 
15.11
 “Overall, the gopis had  extreme  wisdom  in  their  understanding,  and 
therefore  their  love  cannot  be  said  to  be  without  understanding.  
Also, they had thoroughly understood the greatness of Bhagvãn.  Due 
to   the   power   of   that   understanding   of Bhagvãn’s greatness,   the 
qualities  of ãtmã-nishthã and vairãgya naturally  flourished  in  their 
hearts.      Therefore,   it   was   due   to   the   power   of   understanding 
Bhagvãn’s greatness   that   countless kalyãn-kãri qualities, such   as 
ãtmã-nishthã and vairãgya, were fully developed in the gopis. 
 
15.12
 “The characteristics of such a bhakta are  as  follows:    He  wishes  for 
only those panch-vishays (shabda, sparsh, rup, ras,  and gandh) which 
are   related   to Bhagvãn,   but   not   for   those   which  are   related   to 
anything else.  Then, through those vishays, he develops intense love 
for Bhagvãn.    The  love  is  so  intense  that  even  though  he  does  not 
possess  the  qualities  of ãtmã-nishthã and vairãgya,  he  still  does  not 
have any other desire in his heart, except the desire for Bhagvãn. 
 
15.13
 “Consider the following example:  When it has not rained, the seeds 
of  any  types  of  grass  cannot  be  seen  anywhere  on  the  earth.    But, 
when it does rain, so much grass grows that even the earth cannot be 
seen.  Similarly, when a person who does not possess the qualities of 
ãtmã-nishthã and vairãgya meets  with kusang,  though  he  may  seem 
to  have  no  desire  for vishays other  than Bhagvãn,  he  will  begin  to 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 261 - 
have  desires  for  those  objects.    Furthermore,  his  mind  will  become 
corrupted,  and  he  will  not  remember Bhagvãn in  his  heart.    Instead, 
he will constantly crave for the vishays.  As a result, that bhakta who 
loves Bhagvãn, but does not possess the qualities of ãtmã-nishthã and 
vairãgya,  will  feel, ‘I do not have even the slightest love for Bhagvãn’.  
Therefore,  a bhakta who has  love  for Bhagvãn,  but  does  not  possess 
the qualities of ãtmã-nishthã and vairãgya, is extremely inferior. 
 
15.14
 “In comparison, a bhakta whose  love  for Bhagvãn seems  ordinary, 
but  who  has  the  qualities  of ãtmã-nishthã and vairãgya,  feels, ‘The 
murti of Bhagvãn is forever present within my jeevãtmã’.  Because  of 
this ãtmã-nishthã,  he  may  not  seem  outwardly  enthusiastic  for  the 
darshan and  touch  of Bhagvãn’s murti.    In  fact,  he  may  appear  to  be 
very quiet.  However, the roots of his love are very deep.  Moreover, 
his  love  is  not  the  type  that  would  diminish  due  to  the  influence  of 
kusang.  Therefore, this bhakta is superior, and is ekãntik.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur || 15 || 93 || 
 
 
Sãrangpur – 16 
Nar-Nãrãyan Dev’s Tap In Badrikãshram 
 
16.1
 In the Samvat year 1877, on Bhãdarvã sud 5 [12
th
 September, 1820], 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on  the  veranda 
outside  Jeevã  Khãchar’s darbãr in   Sãrangpur.      He   was   dressed 
entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
16.2
 Paramãnand  Swãmi  then  asked  a  question:  “It  is  said  in  the 
Shreemad  Bhãgvat, ‘While residing in Badrikãshram, Nar-Nãrãyan 
Rushi is performing tap for the sake of the kalyãn and happiness of all 
the  people  in  Bharat-Khand’.  So,  why  is  it  that  everyone  does  not 
walk a path of kalyãn?” 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 262 - 
16.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “The answer lies in the fifth skandh of the 
Shreemad Bhãgvat.  It is said, ‘Bhagvãn is performing tap, but he does 
so only for the sake of his bhaktas, not for those who are not bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn’. 
 
16.4
 “Nar-Nãrãyan Bhagvãn,  who  is  dressed  in  the  clothes  of  a tapasvi, 
performs harsh tap out of extreme compassion, and for the benefit of 
those people who realise the rarity of attaining a human body in this 
Bharat-Khand,  and  therefore  attain  the  refuge  of Bhagvãn and  offer 
bhakti to  Him.    While  performing tap,  and  gifted  with  qualities, like 
dharma, gnãn, vairãgya, upsham,  divine  powers,  that  are  constantly 
present in Him to a great extent, he dwells in Badrikãshram until the 
destruction  of  the  universe.    Therefore,  even  if  His bhaktas who  live 
in Bharat-Khand may possess the qualities, such as dharma and gnãn, 
to  a  lesser  degree,  they  flourish  greatly  in  just  a  short  span  of  time 
due  to  the  power  of Bhagvãn’s great tap.    Then,  by  the  will  of 
Bhagvãn,  these bhaktas receive  the darshan of  the pratyaksha murti 
of Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn amidst  the  divine  light  of Akshar-Brahm 
that  is  in  their  hearts.    In  this  way,  due  to Bhagvãn’s tap, bhaktas 
attain kalyãn without  any  difficulties.    However,  those  who  are  not 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn do  not  attain kalyãn.   This  is  the  answer  to  your 
question.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur || 16 || 94 || 
 
 
Sãrangpur – 17 
Differences Among Muktas 
 
17.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on  the  evening  of Bhãdarvã  sud 6  [13
th
 
September,  1820],  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  facing  north  on  a 
decorated   bedstead   on   the   veranda   outside   the   rooms   of   Jeevã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Sãrangpur.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from various places, 
had gathered before Him. 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 263 - 
17.2
 Then Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “As the vision of a person who worships 
Bhagvãn becomes increasingly weak, he realises the unlimited nature 
of Bhagvãn,  and  he  increasingly  realises  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn.  
When  that bhakta identifies  himself  with  the  body,  he  sees Bhagvãn 
as the witness of his jãgrat, svapna, and sushupti states.  Later, when 
he  realises himself  as  beyond  the jãgrat, svapna,  and sushupti states, 
he realises Bhagvãn as beyond them too.  Then, as his vision becomes 
increasingly  weak,  he  realises Bhagvãn as  being  far  beyond  himself 
and  understands  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn even  more.    Then,  as  his 
vrutti attaches   itself   more   and   more   to Bhagvãn with   love,   his 
upãsanã of Bhagvãn becomes even more firmly established. 
 
17.3
 “For  example,  ants,  birds,  men,  cattle,  horses,  elephants,  large 
crocodiles,  and  fish,  all  drink  water  from  the  ocean  and  become 
healthy, but the ocean’s level is not even slightly reduced.  Therefore, 
the  greater  the capacity  of  the  creature,  the  more  it  understands the 
vastness of the ocean. 
 
17.4
 “Here is another example:  A mosquito, a sparrow, a kite, a hawk, an 
analpakshi,  and Garud all  fly  in  the  sky,  yet  to  all  of  them  the  sky  is 
limitless.  However, the greater the strength of their wings, the more 
they understand the vastness of the sky and their own inferiority. 
 
17.5
 “Similarly, a bhakta whose upãsanã is  like  that  of  Marichi  and  other 
prajãpatis,  can  be  compared  to  the  mosquito.    A bhakta, whose 
upãsanã is higher, like that of devs such as Brahmã, can be compared 
to  the  sparrow.    A bhakta, whose upãsanã is  higher  still,  like  that  of 
devs such  as Virãt-Purush,  can  be  compared  to  a  kite.    A bhakta, 
whose upãsanã is  higher  still,  like  that  of Pradhãn-Purush,  can  be 
compared  to  a  hawk.    A bhakta, whose upãsanã is  still  higher,  like 
that  of  pure Prakruti and Purush,  can  be  compared  to  an analpakshi.  
A bhakta, whose upãsanã is even higher, like that of an Akshar mukta 
in Akshardhãm,   is   like Garud.      As   the   powers   of   these bhaktas 
increase,  they  recognise  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn more  and  more.  

SÃRANGPUR 
- 264 - 
Moreover,   as   their   own   powers   increase,   their   master-servant 
relationship with Bhagvãn is also strengthened. 
 
17.6
 “Also, when the person engaged in worship and identified himself 
with  the jeev,  the jeev possessed  the  luminosity  of  a  firefly.    As  he 
continued  worshipping Bhagvãn,  the  eight  barriers  (jad  prakruti) 
were  gradually  overcome,  and  he  became  increasingly  luminous – 
first  like  an  oil  lamp,  then  like  a  torch,  then  like  the  flames  of  a  fire, 
then like  the  flames  of  a  forest  fire,  then  like  lightning,  then  like  the 
moon,  then  like  the  sun,  then  like  the  fire  of  destruction, and  finally, 
he became as radiant as the light of Akshar-Brahm. 
 
17.7
 “In this way, the luminosity, powers, and bliss of such a bhakta 
constantly  increase.    In  the  example,  the  sequence  from  firefly  to 
Akshar-Brahm refers to the difference among the level of muktas.  As 
a  person  reaches  a  higher  spiritual  state, Bhagvãn’s greatness is 
realised to a greater extent, and he attains a higher mukta level.” 
 
17.8
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then bid “Jay Sachidãnand” to everyone and stood 
up.  Then, holding a branch of the tamarind tree, He stood facing east 
and said, “From here, the full moon appears like a small plate.  But, as 
a  person  approaches  it,  it  appears  to  get  increasingly  large.    Then, 
when  he  comes  extremely  close  to  it,  it  becomes  so  vast  that  he  is 
unable to see its limits.  Similarly, as obstacles (mãyã) are overcome 
and   a   person   increasingly   attains   the   proximity   of Bhagvãn,   he 
realises the unlimited greatness of Bhagvãn.  As a result, his sense of 
servitude towards Bhagvãn is increasingly strengthened.” 
 
||End of Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur || 17 || 95 || 
 
   
Sãrangpur – 18 
Saline Land 
 
18.1
  In the Samvat year 1877, on Bhãdarvã sud 8 [15
th
 September, 1820], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  facing  north  on  the 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 265 - 
veranda outside the north-facing rooms of Jeevã Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Sãrangpur.    He  was  wearing  a  white khes and  had  covered  Himself 
with a white chãdar.  He had also tied a white pãgh around His head.  
A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had 
gathered before Him. 
 
18.2
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “If a person with shraddhã comes  across 
the  company  of  a  true sant and  develops shraddhã in  the  words  of 
that sant,  then  all  the kalyãn-kãri qualities  of svadharma, vairãgya, 
gnãn, bhakti, and wisdom, would develop in his heart, and the vicious 
natures, such as kãm, and krodh, would be burnt away.  On the other 
hand, if he encounters kusang  and develops shraddhã in their words, 
then the qualities such as vairãgya and wisdom would be destroyed.  
 
18.3
 “It is like the analogy of saline land.  No matter how much rain falls 
upon  it,  no  grass,  or  anything  else,  can  grow  upon  it.    However,  if  a 
flood were to sweep across the same land, then all the salt would be 
washed  away.    As  a  result,  where  there  was  once  salt,  there  would 
now  be  silt.    If  the  seeds of  banyan,  pipal,  or  other  trees  were  to  fall 
into that silt, they would grow into large trees.  Similarly, if a person, 
who  has  the  previously  mentioned  qualities  of svadharma, vairãgya, 
gnãn, bhakti, and wisdom, firmly rooted in his heart, and who has not 
even the slightest desire for the pleasures of this world, were to meet 
with kusang, then waters (kusang) would sweep across his heart and 
leave  behind silt  (worldly  talks).    Then,  the  seeds  of  vicious  natures, 
such  as kam, krodh, lobh, moh, mad,  and matsar,  which  are  dormant 
in  the  silt,  would  grow  into  large  trees.    Therefore,  a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn should never keep kusang.” 
 
18.4
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj continued, “If a person has some svabhãvs and 
he thoughtfully attempts to eradicate them by associating with a sant, 
then they can be destroyed.  However, a person’s vicious svabhãvs 
will  not  eradicate  if  he  foolishly  applies  any  other  methods.    When 
such  a  fool  becomes  depressed,  he  either  sleeps,  cries,  takes  out  his 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 266 - 
frustrations  on  someone  else,  or  he  may  even  do upvãs.    He  will  use 
any  of  these  four  methods  to  try  to  overcome  his  depression.    If  he 
becomes  severely  depressed,  he  may  even  resort  to  committing 
suicide.    These  are  the  way  in  which  a  fool  attempts  to  overcome 
depression.  However, such methods neither reduce the pain, nor do 
they eradicate a person’s svabhãvs.    On  the  other  hand,  if a  person 
were to attempt to eradicate them with understanding, then both the 
distress and the svabhãv would be eradicated.  Therefore, only those 
who have understanding become happy.” 
 
18.5
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  continued  with  another  example  and  said, 
“Large flames of a fire are extinguished when water is poured over it, 
whereas  even  a  slight  flash  of  lightning  can  never  be  extinguished, 
even  though  it  is  in  the  midst  of  dense  rain  clouds.    Similarly, 
regardless  of  how  much vairãgya a  person  may  have,  or how  much 
love  for Bhagvãn he  may  have,  if  he  does  not  have  understanding, 
then  like  the  flames  of  the  fire,  all  of  his  qualities  will  be  lost  due  to 
water (kusang).  In comparison, a person who has the understanding 
of vairãgya and love is like the fire of lightning.  It may be slight, but it 
is never destroyed.” 
 
18.6
 “Then,  Nirvikãrãnand  Swãmi  asked,  “Mahãrãj,  if  a  person  has  a 
vicious svabhãvs, like kãm and krodh, can they be eradicated, or not?” 
 
18.7
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Just as a merchant keeps an  account  of  all 
his  transactions,  if  a  person  keeps  an  account  of  his svabhãvs from 
the  very  day  he  entered satsang,  then  they  can  be  eradicated.    He 
should think, ‘When I was not in satsang, I had these vicious svabhãvs.  
But,  ever  since  I  have  entered  satsang, they have diminished’.  Then, 
every  year, he should check  to see  if  he  has  progressed  or  if  there  is 
still  some  deficiency  remaining.    However,  a  fool  does  not  keep  an 
account  like  the  merchant  does.    Therefore,  any svabhãvs,  which  a 
person  may  have,  can  be  eradicated  if  he  continuously  examines 
himself while doing satsang.” 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 267 - 
18.8
 Muktãnand Swãmi then asked, “If a person keeps kusang then  it  is 
obvious that he will develop vicious svabhãvs.  But, why is it that such 
vicious svabhãvs arise even after a person associates with a sant?” 
 
18.9
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “During his childhood, a person does not 
face enemies, such as kãm, krodh, and lobh.  Also, at that age, he also 
tends  to  have  more  love  for Bhagvãn.    However,  when  he  enters 
youth, the enemies increase along with the belief that he is the body.  
During that period, if he keeps the company of a sãdhu, who does not 
have  vicious  natures  and  the  belief  that  he  is  the  body,  then  he  will 
cross the ocean of youth.  However, if the youth does not do this, the 
enemies will defeat him, and he will consequently turn vile. 
 
18.10
 “However, if an older person is spoilt while doing satsang,  it  is 
because  whichever avgun he  perceives  in  a  great sant,  all  return  to 
dwell in his own heart.  Conversely, if he perceives the gun of a great 
sant and  thinks, ‘Any svabhãvs the great sant exhibits is only for the 
sake of the kalyãn of jeevs.  In fact, He is flawless; but my identification 
of flaws in him is due to my own personal foolishness’, and he also asks 
for forgiveness for his mistakes, then his deficiencies will diminish. 
 
18.11
 Mahãnubhavãnand Swãmi then asked, “Can rãjasi, tãmasi, and sãttvik 
svabhãvs be eradicated by doing satsang?” 
 
18.12
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj replied, “All svabhãvs can  be  eradicated  if  a  person 
tries to eradicate them.” 
 
18.13
 Mahãnubhavãnand Swãmi asked further, “If that is the case, then 
despite  the  fact  that  Durvãsã  and  others  have  become muktas,  why 
do they still remain tãmasi?” 
 
18.14
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “The qualities, like tamo-gun,  which  are 
seen in Durvãsã and others, are only present because they choose to 
keep them.  They feel, ‘If someone is misbehaving, tamo-gun is actually 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 268 - 
very  necessary  in  order  to  lecture  him.    That is why we keep it’.  
Therefore, they purposely retain these qualities.  Nevertheless, when 
a svabhãv is prevalent in a person, he should have hatred towards it.  
He  should  think, ‘I  am  a  bhakta of Bhagvãn,  and  such  a  vicious 
svabhãv does not suit me’.  In this  way,  by  the  grace  of Bhagvãn,  a 
person’s svabhãvs can  be  eradicated  if  he  regards  them  as  flaws  and 
strives to discard them.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur || 18 || 96 || 
 
 
|| End of Shree Sãrangpur Prakaran ||

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 269 - 
|| SHREE SWÃMINÃRAYAN VIJAYTETRÃM || 
 
 
VACHANÃMRUT 
Shree Kãriyãni Prakaran 
 
Kãriyãni – 1 
A Worm And A Bee 
 
1.1
 In the Samvat year 1877, on Bhãdarvã sud 12 [19
th
 September, 1820], 
a  decorated,  canopied  bedstead  that  had  been  brought  by  Jãdavji 
Bhakta from  Surat,  had  been  placed  on  the  veranda  outside  the 
north-facing rooms of Vastã Khãchar’s darbãr in Kãriyãni.  A mattress 
with  a  white,  silken  cover  had  been  placed  upon  the  bedstead.    A 
large,  white,  cylindrical  pillow  and  red,  silken  knee-cushions  had 
been placed on the mattress.  Also, frills of gold fabric were dangling 
on  all  four  sides  of  the  bedstead.    Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  facing 
north  on  this  beautifully  decorated  bedstead.    He  was  wearing  a 
white khes with a black border, and had tied a white feto with a gold 
border  around  His  head.    Also,  He  had  covered  Himself  with  a shelu 
with  a  gold  border.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him.  They were all staring at the 
charming  appearance  of Shreeji  Mahãrãj,  just  as chakors stare  at  the 
moon with fixed eyes.  
 
1.2
 Then,   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   said   to   the paramhans,  “Please  begin  a 
question-answer discussion amongst yourselves.” 
 
1.3
 Bhudharãnand Swãmi then asked, “Does nishchay in Bhagvãn arise in 
the antah-karans or in the jeev?” 
 
1.4
 Shivãnand Swãmi attempted to answer the question, but was unable 
to do so satisfactorily.  
 
1.5
 So Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “The jeev knows through the buddhi, which is 
the  cause  of  all  knowledge,  and  is  greater  than  all.    That buddhi 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 270 - 
resides in the man, in the chitt, in the ahankãr, in the ears, in the eyes, 
in the nose, in the tongue, in the mouth, in the skin, in the arms, in the 
legs,  in  the  genitals,  and  in  the  anus.    It  resides  in  the  body  in  this 
way,  pervading  it  from  head  to  toe.    The jeev resides  within  this 
buddhi.  However, the jeev is not felt, only the buddhi is felt.   
 
1.6
 “The following example will illustrate this:  When the flames of a fire 
rise and fall, they do so because of the wind.  The rise and fall of the 
flames  are  apparent,  but the  wind is  not  apparent.    Also,  when  dung 
is  placed  in  fire,  the  dung  begins  to  burn.  Then,  when  it  is  placed 
where there is no wind, smoke begins to rise.  At that time, the rising 
smoke  is  apparent,  but  the  wind  within  is  not  apparent.    Also,  the 
clouds that move in the sky are seen to do so because of the wind, but 
the  wind  that  resides  within  them  is  not  apparent.    In  this  way, 
flames,  smoke,  and  the  clouds  represent  the buddhi,  and  the  wind 
represents the jeev. 
 
1.7
 “What is that jeev like?    Well,  the jeev is  the  knower  of  the  beliefs 
formed by the buddhi, and it also knows Brahmã, who is the cause of 
the  beliefs  in  the buddhi.    The jeev knows  the  thoughts  of  the man, 
and  also  knows Chandra,  who  is  the  cause  of  those  thoughts  in  the 
man.    The jeev knows  the  remembrance  in  the chitt,  and  also  knows 
Vãsudev, the cause of the thinking in the chitt.  It knows the ‘I-ness’ of 
the ahankãr, and also knows Rudra, the cause of that ‘I-ness’.  In this 
way,  the jeev perceives  the  four antah-karans,  the  ten indriyas,  and 
the vishays,   and   their   presiding devs,   who   allow   a   person   to 
discriminate   among   those vishays.      The jeev does   all   of   this 
simultaneously. 
 
1.8
 “That jeev appears  to  be  in  one  place;  it  appears  to  be  as  fine  as  the 
tip  of  a spear;  and it  appears  to  be extremely  subtle.    It  appears  this 
ways because it is associated with the buddhi.  But, when that jeev is 
known as the illuminator of the body, the indriyas, the antah-karans, 
the vishays, and their presiding devs, it appears to be extremely vast, 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 271 - 
and   it   appears   to   be   pervasive.      That   is   when   the jeev is   not 
associated with the buddhi. 
 
1.9
 “That jeev is not known by the indriyas, but is known by assumption.  
For  example,  on  seeing  a  sword  weighing  two  hundred  kilograms,  a 
person can infer, ‘The carrier of this sword must be extremely strong’.  
Similarly,  the jeev inspires  the  body, indriyas,  the antah-karans,  the 
vishays, and their presiding devs, simultaneously; therefore it must be 
very  powerful.    This  is  how  the jeev can be known by assumption.”  
Shreeji Mahãrãj answered the question in this way. 
 
1.10
 Nityãnand  Swãmi  then  asked, “Mahãrãj, what is the answer to the 
original question in what you have just said?” 
 
1.11
 Shreeji Mahãrãj clarified, “Well, the answer is that when the belief of 
Bhagvãn has  developed  in  the buddhi,  a  person  should  realise  that 
the belief has also developed within the jeev.  How does that happen?  
Well, the belief initially develops in the indriyas, then in the ahankãr, 
then in the chitt, then in the man, then in the buddhi, and then finally, 
it develops in the jeev.”  This was Shreeji Mahãrãj’s reply. 
 
1.12
 Again, Nityãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, how  can  a  person  know 
when  there  is  belief  of Bhagvãn in  the indriyas?    How  can  a  person 
know when there is belief of Bhagvãn in the antah-karans?  How can 
a person know when there is belief of Bhagvãn within the jeev?” 
 
1.13
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “The  belief  of Bhagvãn which  is  in  the 
indriyas should be known as follows:  Of all the objects in this world 
which are seen, heard, smelt, or touched, some are pleasant and some 
are  unpleasant;  some  give  pleasure  and  some  give  misery;  some  are 
liked  and  some  are  disliked;  some  are  appropriate  and  some  are 
inappropriate.  If no doubts arise even when all these characteristics 
are  apparent  in Bhagvãn,  that  should  be  known  to  be  the  belief  of 
Bhagvãn in the indriyas. 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 272 - 
1.14
 “Furthermore,  of  the  various  effects  of  the  three gun (sattva-gun, 
rajo-gun, and tamo-gun), the effect of tamo-gun is laziness and sleep; 
the effect of rajo-gun is lust and anger; and the effect of sattva-gun is 
tranquillity and self-discipline.  If no doubts arise even when all these 
are  noticed  in Bhagvãn,  then  that  should  be  known  as  the  belief  of 
Bhagvãn in the antah-karans. 
 
1.15
 “Due to nirvikalp samãdhi, Rushabh-Dev Bhagvãn wandered  crazily, 
keeping  a  stone  in  his  mouth.    Although  his  body  burned  in  a  forest 
fire,  he  remained  totally  unaware  of  it.    So,  if  no  doubts  arise  even 
when such a gunãtit state is apparent in Bhagvãn, then that should be 
known as belief of Bhagvãn in the jeev. 
 
1.16
 “For example, ships that travel in the sea carry an iron anchor with 
them.    When  thrown  into  the  sea,  if  that  anchor  is  immediately 
retracted   before   it   reaches   the   seabed,   then   not   much   effort  is 
required;  it  comes  out  of  the  sea  immediately.    However,  if  it  is 
allowed  to  reach  the  seabed  before  it  is  retracted,  then  it  comes  out 
only after great effort.  But, if it is allowed to descend gradually, and it 
settles  and  lodges  itself  into  the  seabed,  then  it  cannot  be  pulled  up 
by  any  means;  it  cannot  be  retracted.    Similarly,  when  a  person 
develops  the  belief  of Bhagvãn in  the jeev,  that  belief  cannot  be 
dislodged in any way whatsoever.”  Shreeji Mahãrãj spoke at length 
in this way, but only a small section has been mentioned here. 
 
1.17
 Then, Chaitanyãnand  Swãmi  asked, “Mahãrãj, Bhagvãn is  greater 
than  the mind  and speech,  and  He is gunãtit.   So, how can  the mãyik 
indriyas and antah-karans perceive Him?” 
 
1.18
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “When the jeev – the  knower  of  the  body, 
indriyas, and antah-karans – becomes  merged  during  the sushupti 
state,  its indriyas and antah-karans also  become  merged  in  that 
sushupti state.  At the time, Bhagvãn inspires that jeev.  When the jeev 
enters  the svapna state  from  the sushupti state,  the  dream-related 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 273 - 
locations, pleasures, vishays, and the jeev are all inspired by Bhagvãn.  
He  inspires  them  during  the jãgrat state  as  well.    In  this  way, 
Bhagvãn inspires  the jeev both  when it is  conscious  of  the  body,  and 
when  it  is  not.    Also,  from Pradhãn, maha-tattva was  formed;  from 
maha-tattva,  the  three  types  of ahankãr were  formed;  from  that 
ahankãr, the indriyas, devs, five mahã-bhuts, and five tan-mãtras were 
formed;   all   these   are   also   inspired   by Bhagvãn.    Virãt,   who   is 
composed of all these tattvas combined, is also inspired by Bhagvãn.  
When  all  of  these  merge  into Mãyã, Bhagvãn inspires  that Mãyã as 
well. 
 
1.19
 “That Bhagvãn also  inspires  both jeev and ishvar when  they  identify 
themselves  with  their  bodies.    He  inspires  both jeev and ishvar even 
when  they  reside  in  the sushupti state,  and  are  merged  by Pradhãn 
and  are  without  any  identify  or  form.    He  inspires Kãl,  which  causes 
Mãyã and  other  entities  to  assume  an  identity  and  form,  and  also 
causes  them  to  abandon  their  identity  and  form.    So,  how can  that 
Bhagvãn be  known  by  the indriyas and antah-karans?    Is  that  your 
question?” 
 
1.20
 Everyone confirmed, “Yes, Mahãrãj, that is the question.” 
 
1.21
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  continued,  “The  answer  to  that  is  as  follows: 
Bhagvãn does not create and sustain the world for His own sake.  In 
fact, it is said in the Shreemad Bhãgvat: 
 
buddhindriya-manah-prãnan janãnãm-asrujat-prabhuha 
matrãtham cha bhavãrtham cha hyãtmane kalpãnaya cha 
 
“This shlok means: Bhagvãn created  the buddhi, indriyas, man,  and 
prãns of all people to enable the jeevs to indulge in the vishays, to take 
birth,  to  transmigrate  to  other loks,  and  to  attain kalyãn.    Therefore, 
Bhagvãn created this universe for the sake of the kalyãn of the jeevs; 
Bhagvãn sustains  it  for  the  sake  of  the kalyãn of  the jeevs;  and 
Bhagvãn also  causes  its  destruction  for  the  sake  of  the kalyãn of  the 
jeevs.  How is that?  Well, He destroys it to allow the jeevs – who are 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 274 - 
tired as a result of undergoing many births and deaths – to rest.  That 
Bhagvãn,  who  acts  in  all  ways  for  the  benefit  of  the jeevs,  becomes 
like  a  human  out  of  compassion.    Then,  when  the jeevs maintain 
profound  association  with  a sant of  that Bhagvãn,  why  should  they 
not be able to know Him?  They can certainly know Him.” 
 
 
1.22
 Then, Bhajanãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, why then does the Vedic 
shlok claim:  
 
yato vãcho nivartante aprãpya manasã saha 
From where speech returns along with the mind without having attained 
Brahm and Bhagvãn. 
 
1.23
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied in a pleased tone, “Well, in that case, the facts 
are  as  follows: pruthvi resides  in ãkãsh,  but  does  not  become  like 
ãkãsh; jal also  resides  in ãkãsh,  but  does  not  become  like ãkãsh; tej 
also  resides  in ãkãsh,  but  does  not  become  like ãkãsh;  and vãyu also 
resides  in ãkãsh,  but  does  not  become  like ãkãsh.    In  the  same  way, 
the mind and speech do not attain Bhagvãn.” 
 
1.24
 Then, Nityãnand Swãmi raised a doubt:  “Mahãrãj, the Shrutis and 
Smrutis claim:   
 
niranjanaha paramam sãmyam-upaiti 
He who is free from the blemishes of mãyã, attains qualities similar to those of 
Bhagvãn 
 
bahavo gnãna-tapasã pootã mad-bhãva-mãgataha 
Many who have been purified by tap in the form of gnãn have attained my 
qualities. 
 
1.25
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “What I just mentioned is regarding the 
mind and the indriyas of a vimukh.  However, the mind and indriyas of 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn do  become merged  with Bhagvãn.    For  example, 
at  the  time  of  destruction, pruthvi,  which  resides  in ãkãsh,  becomes 
one  with ãkãsh; jal also  becomes  one  with ãkãsh; tej also  becomes 
one with ãkãsh; and vãyu also becomes one with ãkãsh.  Similarly, the 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 275 - 
bodies, indriyas, antah-karans, and prãns of those who are bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn, due to their gnãn of Bhagvãn, become like Bhagvãn.  This is 
because Bhagvãn’s murti itself  is divya.    So,  the  bodies, indriyas,  and 
antah-karans of those bhaktas become like Bhagvãn’s indriyas, antah-
karans, and body.  That is why the bodies, indriyas, antah-karans, and 
prãns of those bhaktas, become divya. 
 
1.26
 “Take the following example: A bee captures a worm, stings it, and 
then buzzes over it.  As a result, that worm – in the very same body – 
is transformed into a bee.  Then, none of its bodily parts remain like 
that  of  a  worm; it  becomes  exactly  like  a  bee.    Similarly,  a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn, in that very same body, becomes divya like Bhagvãn.” 
 
1.27
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then concluded by saying, “The essence of this talk 
that I have given is for both a person with firmness in bhakti coupled 
with ãtmã-nishthã,  and  for  a  person  with  firmness  in bhakti alone, 
progress is as described.  However, the indriyas and antah-karans of a 
person  with ãtmã-nishthã only  do  not  become divya like Bhagvãn’s 
murti; he attains only brahm-sattã.” 
 
1.28
 Having spoken in this way, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Now, let us stop 
this  talk,  as  the sabhã has  become  quiet.   Someone please  sing  some 
pleasing kirtans.”  Saying this, He Himself began to perform dhyãn, 
while the sãdhus began singing kirtans. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Kãriyãni || 1 || 97 || 
 
 
Kãriyãni – 2 
A Cursed Intellect 
 
2.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Ãso  sud 2  [9
th
 October,  1820],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  the  veranda  outside  the 
north-facing rooms of Vastã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Kãriyãni.    He  was 
dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 276 - 
2.2
 By Shreeji Mahãrãj’s ãgnã,  the  junior paramhans had  come  to  the 
front of the sabhã and were asking and answering questions amongst 
themselves. 
 
2.3
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Allow me to ask one question.” 
 
2.4
 The junior paramhans responded by saying, “Mahãrãj, please do ask.” 
 
2.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “One person’s intellect is such that since 
the  day  he  joined satsang,  he  may  occasionally  perceive avgun in 
Bhagvãn and  His sant,  but  it  does  not  persist,  and then  passes  away.  
Day by day, he may continue perceiving gun and avgun, but he never 
abandons satsang.  This is because he is wise and realises, ‘There is no 
sant  like  this  in  the  entire  brahmãnd,  and  there  is  no  other  Bhagvãn 
besides his Mahãrãj’.  As  he  has  realised  this,  he  remains  firm  in 
satsang.  On the other hand, another person’s intellect is such that he 
never  perceives avgun in Bhagvãn or  His sant.    But,  even  though  the 
intellects of both bhaktas are outwardly similar, and their nishchay in 
Bhagvãn is  also  similar,  one  person  continues  perceiving avgun, 
while  the  other  does  not.    What  is  the  fault  in  the  intellect  of  the 
person  who  keeps  perceiving avgun?    I  put  this  question  to  Nãnã 
Shivãnand Swãmi.” 
 
2.6
 Nãnã  Shivãnand  Swãmi  then  attempted  to  answer  the  question,  but 
was unable to do so adequately. 
 
2.7
 Then, Bhagvadãnand Swãmi said, “That person’s intellect is cursed.” 
 
2.8
 At that point, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “He is correct.  That is the correct 
answer to the question.  In the world, do people not say, ‘He has been 
cursed by someone?’  In the same way, that individual has been cursed 
because  he  may  have  hurt  a  great sant,  he  may  have  hurt  a  humble 
person,  or  he  may  not  have  served  his  parents.    That  is  why  his 
intellect is the way it is.” 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 277 - 
2.9
 Then, Bhagvadãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, how can his cursed 
intellect be healed?” 
 
2.10
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “This piece of cloth which I wear on my 
head  and  a  thick  cloth  like  a  rug  cannot  be  washed  with  the  same 
amount   of   effort.      This   is   because   this   thin   cloth   is   cleaned 
immediately by washing it with only a small amount of soap.  On the 
other hand, to wash a thick cloth, it must be soaked in water for two 
to four days, and then boiled over a fire.  Only then, after it is washed 
with soap, does it become clean.  Similarly, if a person whose intellect 
is  cursed  follows niyams only  to the  extent  that  everyone  else  does, 
then  that avgun will  not  be  eradicated.    He  should  not  only  remain 
free  of kãm, svãd, lobh, moh,  and mãn as  others.    Instead,  he  should 
become more free of kãm than others; he should become more free of 
lobh than others; he should become more free of svãd than others; he 
should  become  more  free  of moh than  others.    Also,  he  should  go  to 
sleep  later  than  others;  and  he  should  chant  the  name  of Bhagvãn 
with  a mãlã more  often  than  others;  and  he  should  wake  up  a  little 
earlier  than  others.    In  this  way,  if  he  follows niyams more  intensely 
than  others,  his  cursed  intellect  will  be  healed;  otherwise  it  will  not 
be healed.” 
 
2.11
 Then,   Motã   Shivãnand   Swãmi   asked   Motã   Yogãnand   Swãmi   a 
question:  “Do karmas have a form or are they formless?” 
 
2.12
 Motã Yogãnand Swãmi replied, “I do not think I can answer that 
question.” 
 
2.13
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then replied, “In reality, karmas  are  without  a  form, 
but the good or bad fruits which result from those karmas do have a 
form.  Those who claim that karmas have a form are nãstiks.  After all, 
a karma is an action, and so it cannot have a form.” 
 
2.14
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  talked  a  great  deal  in  this  way,  but  only  a  small 
portion has been mentioned here. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Kãriyãni || 2 || 98 || 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 278 - 
Kãriyãni – 3 
Shuk Muni Is A Great Sãdhu 
A Person Cannot Be Known By His Superficial Nature 
 
3.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on  the  evening  of Ãso  vad 7  [14
th
 October, 
1820],   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   facing   north   on   a   decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  north-facing  rooms  of  Vastã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Kãriyãni.   He  was  wearing a  white khes and had 
tied a white feto around His head.  He had also covered Himself with 
a  white chãdar.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 
  
3.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “This Shuk Muni is a very great sãdhu.  
From  the  day  he  began  staying  with  me,  his  enthusiasm  has  been 
ever increasing; in fact, it has never diminished.  Therefore, he is like 
Muktãnand Swãmi.” 
 
3.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then continued, “The affection that people develop 
for each other is due to gun, and the hatred they experience for each 
other  is  due  to avgun.    However,  those gun and avgun cannot  be 
established from a person’s external behaviour.  A person outwardly 
may walk like a cat, fixing his eyes on the floor as he walks, but on the 
inside, he may have intense kãm.  On seeing him behave in this way, a 
person who is not wise would think, ‘He is a very great sãdhu’.  On the 
other hand, someone else may walk with wandering eyes.  On seeing 
him,  a  person  who  is  not  wise  would  think, ‘He is a fake sãdhu’.  
However,  inwardly  he  may  be  extremely  free  of kãm.    Therefore,  a 
person cannot be judged by his external, physical behaviour.  He can 
only  be  judged  after  staying  with  him.    By  staying  with  him,  his 
activities  can  be  observed – the  way  he  talks,  the  way  he  walks,  the 
way  he  eats,  the  way  he  drinks,  the  way  he  sleeps,  the  way  he 
awakens, and the way he sits. 
 
3.4
 “Also, gun and avgun are  more  apparent  during  the  period  of  youth, 
but  they  are  not  so  obvious  during  childhood  or  during  old  age.  

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 279 - 
Someone  may  be  spoiled  as  a  child,  but  as  a  youth  he  becomes 
honourable.  Conversely, someone may be good in his childhood, but 
becomes  spoiled  during  his  youth.    A  person  who  is  determined  in 
that he feels, ‘It is not good that I am having these improper thoughts’, 
and  who  makes  an  effort  to  eradicate  those  thoughts,  and  who 
remains  determined  until  they  have  been  eradicated,  progresses in 
satsang in  his  youth.    On  the  other  hand,  a  person  who  is  careless 
instead  of  being  alert,  will  not  progress.    So,  an  honourable  person 
can be recognised from his childhood.” 
 
3.5
 Having said this, Shreeji Mahãrãj talked at length about His fondness 
for tyãg in His childhood.  He then continued, “A person who is 
honourable does not like the company of immature children from his 
childhood;  he  does  not  have  an  appetite  for  tasty  food; and  he 
continuously  restrains  his  body.    Just  look,  when  I  was  a  child,  I  had 
the same thoughts as Kãrtik Swãmi, and I felt, ‘I want to eliminate all 
the parts of my mother – her flesh and blood – from my body’.  So, after 
many  spiritual  activities,  I  malnourished  my  body  so  much  that  if 
something pierced my body, water would come out, but never blood.  
In  this  way,  a  person  who  is  honourable  can  be  known  from  his 
childhood.” 
 
3.6
 Then, Bhajanãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, is it better to maintain 
this thought in the mind, or is it better to expose the body to tap?” 
 
3.7
 To that, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “The faults due to the body should be 
known,  and  the  faults  due  to  the  mind  should  be  known.    Of  these, 
which  are  the  faults  of  the  body?    Well,  repeated  erections  and 
itching  of  the  genitals,  excessive  movement,  rapid  movement  of  the 
eyes,  smelling  many  types  of  fragrances  quickly,  walking  twenty  or 
twenty-five  miles  quickly,  embracing  someone  with  such  force  that 
his  bones  break,  ejaculating  semen  during  dreams,  and  so  on – all 
these are faults of the body, not the mind.  Even if these faults of the 
body are greatly reduced, lustful desires, as well as desires for eating, 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 280 - 
drinking,   walking,   touching,   smelling,   hearing,   and   tasting,   may 
remain.    These  should  be  known  as  the  faults  of  the  mind.    So,  the 
faults of the body and mind should be distinguished in this way. 
  
3.8
 “Then, the faults of the body should be removed by imposing bodily 
restraints.  Then, once the body is weakened, the remaining faults of 
the  mind  should  be  eradicated  by  thinking, ‘I am the ãtmã, separate 
from desires.  In fact, I am completely blissful’.  A person who practices 
these two methods – bodily restraint and thinking of the ãtmã – is a 
great sãdhu.  If a person has only bodily restraint, but does not think 
of  the ãtmã,  then  it  is  not  appropriate.    Conversely,  if  a  person  only 
thinks  of  the ãtmã,  but  does  not  restrain  his  body,  then  that  is  also 
not  appropriate.   Therefore,  a  person  who  has  both  is  the  best.  
Moreover,  if  these  two  methods – self-discipline  and  thinking – are 
necessary  for  even grahastha satsangis to  practice,  then  a tyãgi 
should definitely practice them.” 
 
3.9
 Then, Nishkulãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, can a person remain like 
that through thinking or through vairãgya?” 
 
3.10
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “A  person  remains  like  that  due  to  the 
company  of  a  great sãdhu.    Furthermore,  a  person  who  is  unable  to 
do so even with the company of a great sãdhu is a great sinner.” 
 
3.11
 Saying that, Shreeji Mahãrãj continued, “If a tyãgi desires  to  indulge 
in the worldly pleasures which are appropriate only for a grahastha, 
then he is as good as an animal eating dry grass.  This is because even 
though he is never going to acquire those objects, he still has a desire 
for them.  It seems that he has not understood that fact properly; and 
as  the  saying  goes,  what  is  the  point  in  asking  the  name  of  a  village 
that a person is not going to visit?  If he does have a craving for those 
objects that he has given up, will it be possible for him to obtain them 
during this lifetime?  He can attain them only if he falls from satsang, 
but   not   while   remaining   in satsang.      Therefore,   a   person   who 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 281 - 
maintains a desire for those pleasures, while remaining in satsang, is 
a  fool.    This  is  because  whoever  remains  in satsang is  required  to 
follow the dharma of a satsangi.  For example, if a woman sets out to 
become a sati but turns back upon seeing the fire, would her relatives 
allow  her  to turn  back?    They  would  force  her  to  burn  on  her 
husband’s funeral pyre.  Also, if a brãhman lady becomes a widow but 
continues  to  dress  like  a married  woman,  will  her relatives  allow  it?  
Certainly   they   would   not.      Therefore,   a   person   who   maintains 
indecent svabhãvs  while  remaining  in satsang has  not  understood 
this  talk.    If  he  had  understood it,  such  indecent svabhãvs  would  not 
remain.” 
 
3.12
 Saying this, Shreeji Mahãrãj bid “Jay Swãminãrãyan” to everyone and 
departed to go to sleep. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Kãriyãni || 3 || 99 || 
 
 
Kãriyãni – 4 
Awareness Of The Jeev, The Buddhi, And The Witness 
 
4.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  four-and-a-half  hours  after  sunrise  on Ãso 
vad 8   [15
th
 October,   1820],   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   the 
veranda outside the north-facing rooms of Vastã Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Kãriyãni.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of 
paramhans, as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered 
before Him. 
 
4.2
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “Please  begin  a  question-answer 
discussion amongst yourselves.” 
 
4.3
 Gopalãnand Swami asked Bhajanãnand Swami, “In this body, how 
much  awareness  is  of  the jeev,  and  how  much  awareness  is  of  the 
witness (Bhagvãn)?” 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 282 - 
4.4
 Bhajanãnand  Swami  attempted  to  answer  the  question,  but  was 
unable to do so. 
 
4.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then replied, “The buddhi pervades  this  body  from 
head to toe.  As a result, it is simultaneously aware of the activities of 
all  the indriyas.    The jeev resides  within  that buddhi by  pervading  it.  
Therefore, the awareness of the buddhi is due to the awareness of the 
jeev.      Similarly,   since   the   witness   resides   within   the jeev,   the 
awareness of the jeev is due to the awareness of the witness.” 
 
4.6
 Nityãnand Swami then asked Shreeji Mahãrãj, “Mahãrãj, the witness 
does  reside  within  the jeev.    But,  realising  that  a  witness  must 
possess a form, the question is how can that which possesses a form 
also be all-pervading?” 
 
4.7
 Hearing  this,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  explained, “That which possesses a 
form  can  also  be  all-pervading.    For  example, Agni-Dev possesses  a 
definite svarup when residing in his lok, but through his powers, he is 
latent  within  wood.    Similarly, Bhagvãn possesses  a  definite  form  in 
His Akshardhãm, but through His antaryãmi powers, He pervades the 
jeevs and  functions  as  if  He  possesses  a  form.    Therefore,  even  that 
antaryãmi form should be considered to possess a form.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Kãriyãni || 4 || 100 || 
 
 
Kãriyãni – 5 
Bhagvãn’s Purpose For Assuming An Avatãr 
 
5.1
 In the Samvat year 1877, on Ãso vad 14 [4
th
 November, 1820], Swãmi 
Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a bedstead with a canopy 
on  the  veranda  outside  the  north-facing rooms of Vastã Khãchar’s 
darbãr in  Kãriyãni.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A 
sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had 
gathered before Him. 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 283 - 
5.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “I wish to ask a question.” 
 
5.3
 The munis responded by saying, “Mahãrãj, please do ask.” 
 
5.4
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Bhagvãn assumes an avatãr on earth to 
grant kalyãn to  the jeevs.    But,  is  He  not  capable  of  granting kalyãn 
while remaining in His dhãm, without assuming an avatãr?  After all, 
Bhagvãn can  grant kalyãn in  any  way  He  wishes.    Then,  what  is  the 
purpose  of  Him  assuming  an avatãr on  earth?    Furthermore,  if 
Bhagvãn can only grant kalyãn when He assumes an avatãr, and He is 
incapable  of  granting kalyãn in  any  other  way,  it  would  suggest  that 
this  is  a  weakness  of Bhagvãn.    But  in  reality, Bhagvãn is  capable  of 
granting kalyãn to  the jeevs by  assuming  an avatãr,  and  He  is  also 
capable  of  granting kalyãn to  the jeevs without  assuming  an avatãr.  
Then,  what  is  the  purpose  of Bhagvãn assuming  an avatãr on  earth?  
That is the question.” 
 
5.5
 The senior sãdhus  answered  according  to  their  own  understanding, 
but were unable to answer Shreeji Mahãrãj’s question adequately.  As 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  raised  doubts  to  their  answers,  their  answers  were 
all  disproved.    The munis then  folded  their  hands  and  requested, 
“Mahãrãj, only you are capable of answering this question.” 
 
5.6
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then explained, “Bhagvãn assumes an avatãr for only 
one  reason:    Having  surrendered  Himself  to  the bhakti of  those 
bhaktas who have intense love for Him, Bhagvãn assumes whichever 
svarup the bhaktas wish  for  in  order  to  grant  them  bliss.    He  then 
fulfils all the desires of His bhaktas.  Since the bhaktas have a physical 
body, Bhagvãn  also  assumes  a  physical  body, and  showers  love  upon 
those bhaktas.    In  addition  to  this, He  suppresses  His  powers  and 
behaves  with  the bhaktas as  a  son,  or  as  a  close  companion,  or  as  a 
friend, or as a relative.  Because of this, the bhakta may not maintain 
much  courtesy  with Bhagvãn.    Nonetheless, Bhagvãn showers  His 
love upon the bhakta in whichever way He desires. 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 284 - 
5.7
 “Therefore, the only reason Bhagvãn assumes an avatãr is to fulfil the 
desires  of  His  beloved bhaktas.    Along  with  this,  He  grants kalyãn to 
innumerable other jeevs and also establishes dharma.  Now, if there is 
any doubt in what I have just said, please speak.” 
 
5.8
  The munis replied, “Mahãrãj, your reply is most appropriate.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Kãriyãni || 5 || 101 || 
 
 
Kãriyãni – 6 
A Person Who Possesses Matsar 
 
6.1
 In the Samvat year 1877, on Ãso vad Amãs [5
th
 November, 1820], the 
day  of  Divãli,  a  row  of  oil  lamps  had  been  arranged  around  a  stage 
which had been assembled in front of the north-facing rooms of Vastã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Kãriyãni.    Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj 
was  sitting  on  a  decorated,  canopied  bedstead  that  had  been  placed 
on  that  stage.    He  was  wearing  a  red survãl made  of kinkhãb with 
golden embroidery.  He was also wearing a black, kinkhãb dagli with 
the words ‘Nar-Nãrãyan-Swãminãrãyan’ imprinted upon it.  Around 
His head He had tied an orange pãgh with a border of golden threads.  
He had also tied a sky-blue coloured feto tightly around his waist, and 
garlands of yellow flowers were hanging around His neck.  A sabhã of 
munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before Him. 
 
6.2
 A  female bhakta from  the  port  of  Deev  had  come  on  that  occasion.  
She  requested  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  to  allow  her  to  perform  His pujã.  
Accepting  her  request,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  came  down  from  His  seat, 
approached the bhakta, and accepted her pujã.  Then, after accepting 
the  clothes,  a  yellow  umbrella,  and  a  pair  of  wooden chãkhadis 
offered by her, He returned to His seat. 
 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 285 - 
6.3
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “For so many years bhaktas have  been 
offering  clothes  and  thousands  of rupees worth  of  jewellery  to  me, 
but I have never gone of my own accord to receive them as I just did.  
Also,  I  have  never  become  as  pleased  by  wearing  the  clothes  and 
jewellery  offered  by  others  as  I  have  just  now.    I  have  become 
extremely pleased upon this bhakta today.” 
 
6.4
 The munis commented, “That bhakta truly does have love.”  In the 
meantime,  Dinã-Nãth  Bhatt  arrived,  bowed  at  the  feet  of  Shreeji 
Mahãrãj, and then sat down.  Shreeji Mahãrãj then gave all the richly 
embroidered clothes to him. 
 
6.5
 Muktãnand Swãmi then asked, “Mahãrãj, by which gun is Bhagvãn 
pleased upon a bhakta?” 
 
6.6
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Bhagvãn is  pleased  with  a bhakta who 
becomes free of kãm, krodh, lobh, kapat, mãn, irshyã, and matsar, and 
then offers bhakti to Bhagvãn.  But, amongst all of those, matsar is the 
root of all avgun.  That is why in the Shreemad Bhãgvat, Shree Vyãsji 
has  noted  that  only  the sãdhu who  is  without matsar is  worthy  to 
possess bhãgvat-dharma.    As  a  result, matsar is  fainter  than  all  the 
other avgun.  Also, it is extremely difficult to eradicate matsar.” 
 
6.7
 Then, Brahmãnand Swãmi asked, “What is the method for eradicating 
matsar?” 
 
6.8
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A person who is a sãdhu,  and  treads  the 
path  of  a sãdhu,  will  be  able  to  eradicate matsar.    However,  if  a 
person does not desire to tread the path of a sãdhu, the matsar within 
him will never be eradicated.” 
 
6.9
 Again, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “What causes matsar?” 
 
6.10
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “There are three causes of matsar:    women, 
wealth, and delicious food.  But, for a person who does not have any 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 286 - 
of  these  three, mãn is  the  cause  of matsar.    Moreover,  for  a  person 
who  possesses matsar,  the  fact  that  I  have  given  these  clothes  to 
Dinã-Nãth  Bhatt,  must  have  led  to matsar.    Such  a  person  would 
never think, ‘The person who brought such richly embroidered clothes 
and  offered  them  to  Mahãrãj should  be  commended.    Mahãrãj should 
also   be   commended   since   He   immediately   gave   them   away   to   a 
brãhman’.  Such a thought would never arise in the heart of a person 
who  possesses matsar.    Even  if  someone  else  gives  something  and 
someone else receives it, a person who possesses matsar burns with 
envy unnecessarily.” 
 
6.11
 “As for me, not even the slightest bit of kãm, krodh, lobh, mãn, matsar, 
or irshyã,  enters  my  heart.    Also,  in  my  heart,  I  experience  a  strong 
hatred for the panch-vishays (shabda, sparsh, rup, ras, and gandh).  In 
fact, I do not have even the slightest interest in any one of the panch-
vishays. 
  
6.12
 “Whenever I accept food or clothes, I do so on seeing the bhakti of the 
bhaktas;  I  never  accept  them  for  own  physical  pleasure.    All  of  my 
actions, like eating, drinking, and wearing clothes, are for the sake of 
all the sãdhus and satsangis.  If I have the feeling that it is for my own 
sake and not for their sake, then I would immediately discard it. 
 
6.13
 “The only reason I keep this physical body is for the sake of the 
satsangis;  besides  that,  there  is  no  other  reason.   Bhaktas such  as 
Mulji  Brahm-Chãri  and  Somlã  Khãchar,  who have  been  staying  close 
to  me  for  so  many  years,  know  my  nature  and  realise, ‘Besides the 
bhaktas  of  Bhagvãn,  Mahãrãj does  not  have  love  for  anything  else.    In 
fact, Mahãrãj is not affected by anything, just like ãkãsh’.  In this way, 
those who constantly stay near me know my nature.  I have sacrificed 
my  body  for  the  sake  of  those  who  are bhaktas of Bhagvãn by  word, 
thought,  and  deed.   Therefore,  in  all  ways, I  am  attached  to  whoever 
is  a bhakta of Bhagvãn.    To  me,  the  wealth  of  the  fourteen loks, 
without the bhaktas of Bhagvãn,  seems  as  worthless  as  a  blade  of 
grass. 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 287 - 
6.14
 “In addition, even those who are bhaktas of Bhagvãn and  have  firm 
love  only  for Bhagvãn,  will  not  find  pleasure  in  the  enticing vishays.  
Although  they  may  sustain  the  body  with  ordinary vishays,  they 
immediately become miserable by attractive vishays.  Therefore, only 
such a person can be considered to be a completely perfect bhakta of 
Bhagvãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Kãriyãni || 6 || 102 || 
 
 
Kãriyãni – 7 
Vairãgya Due To Obsession 
Ãtyantik Kalyãn 
 
7.1
 In the Samvat year 1877, on the night of Kãrtik sud 1 [6
th
 November, 
1820], a  row  of oil  lamps  had  been  arranged  around  a  stage  in front 
of  the  north-facing rooms of Vastã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Kãriyãni.  
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  bedstead  that  had  been  placed  on 
the  stage.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of 
paramhans, as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered 
before Him. 
 
7.2
 Then,  Kãshidãs  of  the  village  of  Bochãsan  asked  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  a 
question:  “Mahãrãj, tyãgis follow the path of nivrutti; therefore, they 
are   able   to   keep   their vrutti constantly   on Bhagvãn.      However, 
grahasthas follow  the  path  of pravrutti;  so,  they  are  plagued  with 
countless  worldly  problems.    What  understanding  must  a grahastha 
maintain in order to fix his vrutti constantly on Bhagvãn?” 
 
7.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The grahastha should believe, ‘Just as I had 
parents,  wives,  and  children  during  my  past  lives  in  the  cycle  of  8.4 
million life-forms, I have the same in this life as well.  In fact, there must 
be   many   mothers,   sisters,   and   daughters   from   many   past   lives 
wandering around, and yet, just as I do not have any sense of ‘my-ness’ 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 288 - 
for them, similarly, I should not keep any sense of ‘my-ness’ for the 
relations  of  this  body either’.  Thinking  in  this  way,  if  he  diverts  his 
affection from everything else, maintains firm affection only towards 
Bhagvãn, and keeps the company of a sãdhu, then even a grahastha’s 
vrutti can remain constantly fixed on Bhagvãn, just like the vrutti of a 
tyãgi.” 
 
7.4
 Hearing these words of Shreeji Mahãrãj, all the grahasthas present in 
the sabhã folded their hands and asked, “Mahãrãj, what will become 
of the grahastha who is unable to behave in that way?” 
 
7.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “I spoke in reference to a person who, 
having eradicated all desires for all objects except Bhagvãn, keeps his 
vrutti constantly  on Bhagvãn.    But,  someone  who  is  not  so  strong 
should  abide  by  the dharma of satsang.    He  should  also rely  on  the 
strength  of Bhagvãn and  His sant,  whose  refuge  he  has  taken,  by 
believing, ‘Bhagvãn is adham-udhãran  and  patit-pãvan,  and  I  have 
attained Him in person’.’’  After hearing these words from Shreeji 
Mahãrãj, the bhaktas became extremely pleased. 
 
7.6
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then asked the sant, “What causes vairãgya to arise?” 
 
7.7
 The sãdhus  replied  according  to  their  understanding,  but  Shreeji 
Mahãrãj’s question could not be answered adequately.  So they said, 
“Mahãrãj, you will have to answer that question.”  
 
7.8
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “Upon hearing the words of the shãstras 
and sat-purush, developing a fascination that does not diminish once 
developed,  is  the  only  cause  for vairãgya;  there  is  no  other  cause.  
Whoever  is  fascinated  in  this  way,  will  develop vairãgya,  regardless 
of  whether  he  is tãmasi, rãjasi,  or sãttvik.    On  the  other  hand,  if  a 
person   does   not   have   such   an   fascination,   he   will   not   develop 
vairãgya.  Also, if someone’s fascination diminishes after a few days, 
then  the vairãgya that develops  can  cause  tremendous  harm.    How?  

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 289 - 
Well, when he does have the fascination, he renounces and leaves his 
home.    Then,  after  he  becomes  a sãdhu,  the  fascination  that  he  had 
previously  developed,  subsides;  but  the  house  he  left  behind  would 
be in ruins.  Then, like the dog of a washer-man, who is fed neither at 
home  nor  at  the  river,  he  falls  from  both  paths.    On  the  other  hand, 
those who have firm vairãgya, attain Akshardhãm.” 
 
7.9
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  another  question  to  the paramhans,  in 
an extremely pleased mood:  “What is ãtyantik kalyãn?    Also,  how 
does a person who has attained ãtyantik kalyãn and siddh-dashã, feel 
in all of his activities?” 
 
7.10
 The munis answered  according  to  their  understanding,  but  Shreeji 
Mahãrãj’s question was not answered  adequately.    So,  all  the munis 
folded their hands and said to Shreeji Mahãrãj, “Mahãrãj, you will 
have to answer that question.” 
 
7.11
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “During the destruction of the brahmãnd, 
the   twenty-four tattvas,   which   have   evolved from Prakruti,   are 
absorbed  into Prakruti.    Then, Prakruti-Purush also  disappear  in  the 
divine light of Akshar-Brahm, after which only the concentrated light, 
which  is sachidãnand,  remains.    The divya murti of Purushottam 
Bhagvãn Vãsudev is  constantly  present  in  that  divine  light.    Through 
that divya murti,   He   Himself   becomes   visible   to   everyone,   and 
incarnates on earth in human form for the purpose of granting kalyãn 
to the jeevs.  But, the jeevs on earth who are ignorant fools, claim that 
Bhagvãn has mãyik qualities within Him.  In reality, he does not have 
any mãyik qualities within Him; He is forever gunãtit and has a divya 
murti.  Moreover, it is that very same Bhagvãn, who has a murti and is 
divya,    which    the    Vedãnt shãstras propound as    being nirgun, 
achhedhya, abhedhya,   and   pervading   everywhere.      He   has   been 
described  as  being nirgun,  in  order  to  dismiss  the mãyik view  from 
the mind of the jeev.  That Bhagvãn remains the same during the time 
of creation, sustenance, and destruction of the universe; He does not 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 290 - 
undergo   any   changes   like   worldly   objects   do,   and   He   always 
maintains  a divya svarup.    Having  such  a  firm  belief  of pratyaksha 
Purushottam, is called ãtyantik kalyãn. 
 
7.12
 “A  person  who  has  attained siddh-dashã through   such   belief, 
experiences  the  following:    Wherever  he  casts  his  eyes – among  all 
the sthãvar and jangam forms – he sees the murti of Bhagvãn as if it is 
before    his    eyes,    the    same murti that    constantly    remains    in 
Akshardhãm even  after  the  destruction  of  the  body,  the brahmãnd 
and Prakruti-Purush.    Other  than  that murti,  he  does  not  perceive 
even  an  atom.    These  are  the  characteristics  of  a  person  who  has 
attained siddh-dashã.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Kãriyãni || 7 || 103 || 
 
 
Kãriyãni – 8 
Sagun And Nirgun  
 
8.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Kãrtik  sud 4  [9
th
 November,  1820], 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on  the  veranda 
outside the north-facing rooms of Vastã Khãchar’s darbãr in Kãriyãni.  
He was dressed entirely in white clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
8.2
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked a question:  “Mahãrãj, the Veds, the 
shãstras,  the  Purãns,  and  the  historical shãstras,  have  described  the 
sagun svarup of Bhagvãn and  have  also  described His nirgun svarup.  
So,  how  should  a  person  understand  the nirgun svarup,  and  how 
should he understand the sagun svarup of Shree Purushottam?  Also, 
how  much  does  a bhakta of Bhagvãn benefit  by  understanding  the 
nirgun svarup of  that Bhagvãn,  and  how  much does  he  benefit  by 
understanding the sagun svarup of that Bhagvãn?” 
 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 291 - 
8.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The nirgun svarup of Bhagvãn is  much 
subtler than that which is subtle.  It is the ãtmã of all the tattvas, such 
as pruthvi and jal; it is the ãtmã of Pradhãn-Purush, which are higher 
than  those tattvas;  and  it  is  the ãtmã of  pure Purush and Prakruti 
which  are  themselves  higher  than Pradhãn-Purush;  it  is  the ãtmã of 
even Akshar who is higher than them.  All these make up the sharir of 
Bhagvãn.  Just as the jeev is subtler, purer, and of greater luminosity 
than  the  body,  in  the  same  way,  compared  to  all  the  other  entities, 
Bhagvãn is  much  more  subtle,  pure,  unaffected,  and  luminous.    For 
example, ãkãsh pervades   the   four bhuts (pruthvi, jal, tej   vãyu).  
Moreover,   it   remains   unaffected   by   those   four bhuts,   and   the 
influences  of  those  four bhuts do  not  affect ãkãsh.    In  fact,  despite 
dwelling in those four bhuts, ãkãsh remains absolutely unaffected.  In 
the  same  way, Purushottam Bhagvãn dwells  in  all  as  their ãtmã.  
Despite  this,  He  is  absolutely  unchanged  and  untainted,  and  He 
maintains   His   own   unique   characteristics;   no   one   is   capable   of 
becoming like Him.  
 
8.4
 “For example, even though ãkãsh dwells  within  the  four bhuts,  the 
four bhuts are  incapable  of  becoming  unaffected  and  untainted  like 
ãkãsh.  Similarly, Purushottam Bhagvãn is the ãtmã of all, yet no one 
up  to  and  including Akshar is  capable  of  becoming  as  powerful  as 
Purushottam Bhagvãn.  In this way, being extremely subtle, extremely 
unaffected,     extremely     pure,     extremely     untainted,     extremely 
luminous,  and  possessing  tremendous,  divine  powers  is  the nirgun 
aspect  of  the murti of  that Bhagvãn.    In  another  example,  if  Mount 
Girnãr  were  to  be  placed  next  to  Mount  Lokã-Lok  it  would  appear 
extremely    small.        In   the   same    way,    before   the    vastness   of 
Purushottam Bhagvãn,  countless  millions  of brahmãnds,  which  are 
encircled by the eight barriers (jad prakruti), appear extremely small, 
like  mere  atoms.    Those brahmãnds do  not  become  smaller,  but 
before the vastness of Bhagvãn they appear smaller.  In this way, the 
extreme  vastness  of  the murti of Bhagvãn is  the sagun aspect  of 
Bhagvãn. 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 292 - 
8.5
 “Then, someone may doubt, ‘In His nirgun svarup, Bhagvãn is subtler 
than  the  extremely  subtle,  and  in  His  sagun  svarup,  He  is  more  vast 
than the extremely vast.  Then, what is the nature of the original svarup 
of Bhagvãn, who assumes both of these svarups?’ 
 
8.6
 “Then, answer to that is that the pratyaksha svarup of Bhagvãn visible 
in a human svarup is the eternal and original svarup of Bhagvãn.  His 
nirgun and sagun aspects  are  the  special,  divine  powers  of  that 
svarup.    For  example, Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn and  Arjun  sat  in  a 
chariot  and  went  to  retrieve  the  son  of  the brãhman.    After  crossing 
Mount  Lokã-Lok,  they  reached  the  darkness  of Mãyã.   Shree  Krishna 
pierced  that Mãyã using  his sudarshan chakra.    Then,  reaching  the 
light of Brahm, which is beyond that Mãyã, he retrieved the son of the 
brãhman from  Bhumã-Purush  who  resides  there.   In  that  situation, 
the   chariot   and   horses   were mãyik and   physical,   but   through 
contact with Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn,  they  became  extremely  subtle 
and chaitanya;  so,  they  reached  the nirgun Akshardhãm of Bhagvãn.  
In this way, to impart subtlety to physical objects is the nirgun aspect 
of Shree Krishna Bhagvãn’s murti. 
 
8.7
 “Furthermore, that same Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn showed  the  whole 
brahmãnd,  including  the  eight  barriers  (jad  prakruti)  which  encircle 
it,  in  his  own  mouth  to  his  mother,  Yashodãji.    To  Arjun, he  also 
revealed the Vishvarup form in his own svarup.  At the time, with the 
exception of Arjun, everyone saw the svarup of Bhagvãn as being five-
and-a-half feet in height.  Also, when Bhagvãn assumed the avatãr of 
Vãman,  he  initially  gave darshan in  the  form  of  a  dwarf.    However, 
after  he  had  made  Bali  give  up  as  much  land  as  could  be  covered  in 
three  footsteps,  he  increased  the  size  of  his  own svarup to  such  an 
extent that one footstep alone covered the seven Pãtãls, with his own 
body  covering  the  entire  sky.    With  his  second  footstep,  he  covered 
the  seven  Svargs  and  pierced  the  outer  shell  of  the brahmãnd.    Bali 
Rãjã  saw  this  vast svarup of Bhagvãn,  but others only  saw  the  dwarf 
svarup of Bhagvãn. 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 293 - 
8.8
 “In this way, Bhagvãn’s vastness,  which  is  even  more  vast  than  the 
extremely vast, is the sagun aspect of Bhagvãn’s murti.  For example, 
the   sky   is   cloudless   during   the   winter   and   summer,   but   when 
monsoon  arrives,  it  becomes  overcast  with  innumerable  clusters  of 
clouds.    With  time,  these  clouds  form in  the  sky  and  later  disperse 
again.  In the same way, by His own will, Bhagvãn reveals His divine 
powers  from  Himself  in  their nirgun and sagun aspects,  and  also 
withdraws  them  back  within  Himself.    That Bhagvãn appears  to  be 
like  a  human,  but  no  one  is  able  to  understand  the  limits  of  His 
greatness.    If  a bhakta realises  the nirgun and sagun aspects  in 
Bhagvãn’s svarup in  this  way,  then Kãl, karma,  and Mãyã would  be 
incapable   of   binding   him,   and   throughout   the   day   he   would 
continuously experience wonder in his heart.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Kãriyãni || 8 || 104 || 
 
 
Kãriyãni – 9 
As Stubborn As A Buffalo 
 
9.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Kãrtik  sud 5  [10
th
 November,  1820], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  north-facing  rooms  of  Vastã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Kãriyãni.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from various places, 
had gathered before Him.  
 
9.2
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  a  question  to  Nityãnand Swãmi  and 
Brahmãnand Swãmi:  “Suppose there is someone who is so unkind 
and stubborn, that once he develops a grudge for someone, he never 
abandons that grudge.  Instead, he continues to remain stubborn like 
a buffalo.  Can such a person be called a sãdhu or not?” 
 
9.3
 Both replied, “A person who is like that cannot be called a sãdhu.” 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 294 - 
9.4
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked a question:  “Mahãrãj, there may be a 
bhakta of Bhagvãn who  perceives avgun in  some  other bhakta,  and 
due to that, he develops hatred for that bhakta.  How can he eradicate 
the perception of that avgun?” 
 
9.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A person who has the bhakti of Bhagvãn in 
his   heart   and   realises   the   greatness   of Bhagvãn,   would   never 
perceive avgun in  a bhakta of Bhagvãn,  and he  would  never  develop 
an unkind stubbornness towards a bhakta of Bhagvãn.  For example, 
Uddhavji  had  understood  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn,  and  therefore 
asked  for  a vardãn:   ‘May I be reborn as any of the vines, or blades of 
grass,  or  shrubs  in  Vrundãvan  in  order  to  have the  privilege  of  being 
touched by the dust of the feet of the gopis’.  Also, Shree  Krishna 
Bhagvãn told Baldevji that the trees, birds, and deer in Vrundãvan are 
extremely  fortunate.    Even Brahmã asked  for  a vardãn from Shree 
Krishna Bhagvãn:  ‘O Bhagvãn!  May I be so highly blessed to be able to 
serve  your  holy  feet  as    your  dãs,  either  in  this  life,  or  in  the  life  of  an 
animal or bird’. 
 
9.6
 “Therefore, a person who understands the greatness of a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn in  this  way  will  never  develop  a  grudge  due to a person’s 
avgun.    Moreover,  a  person  who  understands  such  greatness  never 
takes  into  account  even  minor avgun that  are  present  in  a bhakta of 
the pratyaksha svarup his  own ishta-dev.    In  fact,  a  person  who 
realises the greatness of Bhagvãn looks upon even animals, trees, and 
shrubs, which have come into contact with Bhagvãn, as equivalent to 
devs.  If that is so, what can be said of those people who are engaged 
in  the bhakti of Bhagvãn,  abiding  by  the vartmãn,  and  chanting  the 
name of Bhagvãn?  He would certainly look upon them as equivalent 
to devs and would not think unkindly of them. 
 
9.7
 “Therefore, a person who understands the greatness of Bhagvãn does 
not develop hatred towards bhaktas of Bhagvãn.  On the other hand, 
a  person  who  does  not  understand  such  greatness  does  develop 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 295 - 
hatred  towards  them.    Therefore,  a  person  who  does  not  realise  the 
greatness of Bhagvãn and His bhakta should be known as being half-
fallen,  even  if  he  is  a satsangi.    Only a  person  who  understands  the 
greatness  of Bhagvãn and  the bhaktas of Bhagvãn should  be  known 
to be a perfect satsangi.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Kãriyãni || 9 || 105 || 
 
 
Kãriyãni – 10 
Checking The Pulse 
A Sãdhu Can Only Please Bhagvãn By Performing Tap 
 
10.1
 In   the Samvat year   1877,   on   the   night   of Kãrtik   sud 10   [15
th
 
November,  1820],  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  in 
one of the east-facing rooms of Vastã Khãchar’s darbãr in Kãriyãni.  A 
sabhã of ten or twelve senior sãdhus and five or six haribhaktas were 
sitting before Him.  Shreeji Mahãrãj seemed to have a fever, and so he 
was  warming  Himself  in  front  of  a  coal  stove  that  had  been  placed 
before Him. 
 
10.2
 Then, Shreeji  Mahãrãj  told  Muktãnand  Swãmi, “Please  check my 
pulse.  It seems as if there is a slight illness in my body.” 
 
10.3
 Then, after checking His pulse, Muktãnand Swãmi said, “Mahãrãj!  It 
seems to be a serious illness.”  Saying this, he continued, “Mahãrãj, it 
seems that the times are tough for the satsangis right now.  After all, 
Mahãrãj, you are as vital to the satsangis as their lives, and any illness 
in   your   body   is   the   very   meaning   of   a   difficult   period   for   all 
satsangis.” 
 
10.4
 Hearing  this,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “In  order  to  please Bhagvãn, 
Nãradji performed severe tap by enduring cold and heat, hunger and 
thirst, for many yugs; and due to this, he was able to please Bhagvãn.  
In  the  same  way,  a  person  who  is  wise  deliberately  performs tap by 
restraining  his  body  and indriyas.    Therefore,  a sãdhu who  is  wise 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 296 - 
should also behave so as to deliberately induce suffering to his body 
and indriyas.    If  that  is  so,  why  should  he  wish  to  relieve  whatever 
suffering comes his way due to Bhagvãn’s wish? 
 
10.5
 “Moreover, a tyãgi sãdhu should  firmly  maintain  the  following  wish 
in his mind:  ‘I do not desire the pleasures of the panch-vishays found in 
Dev-Lok, Brahm-Lok, Vaikunth, and other loks.  In this very body, or by 
going  to  Badrikãshram  and  Shvet-Dvip  after  I  die,  I  wish  to  please 
Bhagvãn  by  performing  tap.    Furthermore,  even  if  it  takes  one  life  or 
two   lives   or   a   thousand   lives,   I   wish   to   please   Bhagvãn   only   by 
performing tap’. 
 
10.6
 “Furthermore, the jeev’s kalyãn is  attained  only  by  the  following 
understanding:   ‘Everything happens by the will of Shree Krishna-
Nãrãyan, not by Kãl, karma, or Mãyã’.  In this way, understanding that 
only Bhagvãn is the all-doer, is the best cause of kalyãn.  Performing 
tap,  however,  earns Bhagvãn’s pleasure.    Yet  even  while  performing 
tap,  a  person  should  keep  such  feelings  as Rãdhikãji and Lakshmiji 
keep  for Bhagvãn when  offering  loving bhakti.    If  a  person  still 
understands only Bhagvãn to be the all-doer, then even if he does not 
perform tap, his jeev overcomes the misery of births and deaths.  But, 
without  performing tap, Bhagvãn’s pleasure  is  not  bestowed  upon 
that jeev. 
 
10.7
 “There is no sinner worse than the person who does not realise 
Bhagvãn to be the all-doer.  In fact, he should be known to be a sinner 
worse   than   a   person   who   has   killed   a   cow,   killed   a brãhman, 
associated with the wife of his own guru, or criticised a sadguru who 
is  a  knower  of brahm.    This  is  because  he  believes Kãl, karma,  and 
Mãyã,  to  be  the  cause  of  everything;  not Bhagvãn.    In  fact,  a  person 
should not even stand in the shadow of such persons who are nãstik 
outcasts, nor should he listen to their talks, even unknowingly. 
 
10.8
 “Furthermore, by the grace of Bhagvãn,  those  who  are bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn may  become  like Brahmã, Shiv,  Shukji,  or Nãrad;  they  may 
even become like Prakruti-Purush; or they may become like brahm or 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 297 - 
Akshar.      However,   no   one   is   capable   of   becoming   like Shree 
Purushottam-Nãrãyan.  Therefore, just like a vile person is shunned, a 
person  should  immediately  shun  the  company  of  those  persons  and 
those shãstras that  disprove  the upãsanã of Bhagvãn and  break  his 
master-servant relationship with Bhagvãn.” 
 
10.9
 Then,  Muktãnand  Swãmi  asked,  “Mahãrãj,  a bhakta who   serves 
Bhagvãn by offering beautiful clothes, jewellery, and various types of 
food,  also  desires  to  please Bhagvãn.    Yet,  you  are  saying  that  a 
person   can   only   please Bhagvãn through tap.      Then,   what   is 
inappropriate   about   pleasing Bhagvãn through   such   offerings, 
without restoring to tap?” 
 
10.10
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If the person who is offering bhakti to 
Bhagvãn with such lavish objects does so without any desires, solely 
for the purpose of earning Bhagvãn’s pleasure, then it is all right.  On 
the other hand, if he is tempted by those objects, viewing them to be 
Bhagvãn’s prasãd, and leaving Bhagvãn aside, if he develops affection 
for  those  objects,  then  by  indulging  in  the vishays,  he  will  become 
engrossed   in   them   and   corrupted   by   them – that   is   what   is 
inappropriate.    Therefore,  a tyãgi should  realise Bhagvãn to  be  the 
all-doer  and  strive  to  please Bhagvãn only by  performing tap.    He 
should  also  worship Bhagvãn by  offering  loving bhakti in  the  same 
way as Rãdhikãji and Lakshmiji.  That is my principle.” 
 
10.11
 Then, Brahmãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, please tell us how we can 
benefit in this lok and in the lok we attain after death?” 
 
10.12
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The principle that I have just explained is 
itself the only means to attain supreme bliss, in this lok and in other 
loks.” 
 
10.13
 Then, Gopalãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, in a person’s mind, he may 
have great  enthusiasm  to  develop  the  qualities of tyãg and  perform 
tap.  But, if some obstacle is encountered in the process, what should 
he do?” 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 298 - 
10.14
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A person who has great dedication in any 
activity would never be held back, even if he were to face thousands 
of obstacles.  That should be known to be true dedication.  Just see, it 
has   been   twenty-one   years   since   I   first   met   Rãmãnand   Swãmi.  
During  this  period,  I  have  come  across  countless bhaktas who  have 
been   offering   countless  varieties  of   clothes,   jewellery,   food,   and 
drink.  Despite this, my mind has never been tempted by any of those 
objects.  This is because I have dedication only for tyãg. 
 
10.15
 “Furthermore,  in  this  world  there  are  so  many  widows  who, 
following  the  death  of  their  husbands,  continue  to  grieve.    On  the 
other hand, there are also many women who renounce their wedded 
husbands and engage themselves in worshipping Bhagvãn.  Similarly, 
there  are  so  many  foolish  men  who  mourn  the  loss  of  their  own 
wives  and  continues  to  have  desires  for  other  women.    However, 
there  are  so  many  men  with vairãgya,  who  renounce  their  own 
wedded  wives  and  engage  themselves  in  worshipping Bhagvãn.    In 
this way, each and every person has a different type of dedication. 
 
10.16
 “But, my dedication and principle is just this:  A person should strive 
to  please Bhagvãn by  performing tap.    Also,  realising Bhagvãn to  be 
the  all-doer,  he  should  offer bhakti to  Him  while  maintaining  a 
master-servant  relationship,  and he should  not  allow  the upãsanã of 
that Bhagvãn to  be  violated  in  any  way.    All  of  you  should  accept 
these words of mine as the most supreme principle.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Kãriyãni || 10 || 106 || 
 
 
Kãriyãni – 11 
The Characteristics Of Love 
 
11.1
 In   the Samvat year   1877,   on   the   night   of Kãrtik   sud 11   [16
th
 
November, 1820], Shreeji Mahãrãj was sitting on the veranda outside 
the east-facing rooms of Vastã Khãchar’s darbãr in Kãriyãni.  He was 
wearing  a  white khes and  a  white dagli made  of chhint.    He  had  also 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 299 - 
tied  a  white pãgh around  His  head,  and  was  wearing  garlands  of 
yellow  and  red guldãvadi flowers.    Tassels  of  yellow  flowers  were 
also  dangling  from  His pãgh.    In  addition  to  this,  two  barbers  who 
were  holding  torches,  were  standing  before  Him  on  either  side.    A 
sabhã of munis,  as  well as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had 
gathered before Him. 
 
11.2
 Then,  Sachidãnand  Swãmi  asked Shreeji  Mahãrãj,  “What  are  the 
characteristics of a person who has love of Bhagvãn?” 
 
11.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A person who has love for his beloved 
Bhagvãn,  will  never  disobey  the  wishes  of  his  beloved.    That  is  that 
characteristic  of  love.    To  take  an  example,  the gopis had  love  for 
Shree Krishna Bhagvãn.  So, when Shree Krishna Bhagvãn prepared to 
leave  for  Mathurã,  all  of  them  together  decided, ‘We will  disobey  the 
norms of family traditions and society, and we will keep Bhagvãn here 
by force’.  However, at the time of Shree Krishna Bhagvãn’s departure, 
they looked into his eyes and realised that it was not his wish to stay.  
As  a  result,  all  of  them  remained  far  away,  because  in  their  hearts, 
they  feared, ‘If we do not act according to Bhagvãn’s wishes, His love 
for us will subside’.  Thinking  in  this  way,  none  of  them  were  able  to 
utter a word. 
 
11.4
 “Then, after Bhagvãn went  to  Mathurã,  even  though Shree  Krishna 
was  only  five  miles  away,  the gopis never  disobeyed  his  wishes  by 
going for his darshan.  They realised, ‘If we do go to Mathurã against 
Bhagvãn’s wish, then the love that Bhagvãn has for us will diminish’. 
 
11.5
 “Therefore, the characteristic of love is exactly this:  A person who 
has true love for someone acts according to that person’s wishes.  If 
he  realises  his  beloved  to  be  pleased  by  his  staying  nearby,  then  he 
stays  nearby.    On  the  other  hand,  if  he  realises  his  beloved  to  be 
pleased by his staying away, then he stays away; but in no way does 
he behave contrary to his beloved’s wish.  That is the characteristic of 
love.  So, since the gopis had true love for Bhagvãn, they did not go for 
Bhagvãn’s darshan without  his ãgnã.    Only  when Bhagvãn sent  for 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 300 - 
them  in  Kurukshetra  did  they  have darshan of Bhagvãn,  but  in  no 
way  did  they  disobey Bhagvãn’s ãgnã.    Therefore,  a  person  who  has 
love  for Bhagvãn would  never  disobey Bhagvãn’s ãgnã.    He  would 
only  act  according to Bhagvãn’s wishes.   That is  the  characteristic  of 
love.” 
 
11.6
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Now let me ask a question.” 
 
11.7
 The munis responded, “Mahãrãj, please do ask.” 
 
11.8
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Except for those panch-vishays which are 
related  to Bhagvãn,  a bhakta of Bhagvãn treats  all  other vishays as 
worthless.      Therefore,   he   associates   only   with Bhagvãn.      Now, 
suppose Bhagvãn were to issue the following ãgnã to such a bhakta:  
‘Live away from me’.  In that situation, if he keeps a selfish desire for 
Bhagvãn’s darshan, it would amount to disobeying the ãgnã; and if he 
does  not  follow  the ãgnã,  then  the  love  that Bhagvãn has  towards 
that bhakta would  not  remain.    Therefore,  just  as  that bhakta has 
abandoned  the  worldly vishays (shabda,  sparsh,  rup,  ras,  and  gandh), 
does he also abandon the vishays related to Bhagvãn, or does he not?  
That is the question.” 
 
11.9
 Each   of   the munis gave   an   answer   according   to   his   level   of 
intelligence, but the question was not answered satisfactorily.  Then, 
they said to Shreeji Mahãrãj, “Mahãrãj, you will have to provide the 
answer.” 
11.10
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If a bhakta has deep love for Bhagvãn, 
treats  the  worldly panch-vishays that  are  not  related  to Bhagvãn as 
worthless,  and  if  he is  firmly  attached  to Bhagvãn via  the panch-
vishays,  then  wherever  such  a bhakta goes  by Bhagvãn’s ãgnã,  the 
murti of Bhagvãn also  goes  with  him.    Moreover,  just  as  that bhakta 
cannot  remain  without Bhagvãn,  in  exactly  the  same  way, Bhagvãn 
also cannot remain without the bhakta.  In fact, He does not leave the 
heart of the bhakta even for a fraction of a second.  Therefore, such a 
bhakta does constantly maintain contact with Bhagvãn in the panch-

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 301 - 
vishays.  This is because the same panch-vishays that no one can stay 
without, that bhakta has considered to be worthless.  Instead, he has 
attached  himself  to Bhagvãn in  the panch-vishays.    Therefore,  that 
bhakta maintains a constant relationship with Bhagvãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Kãriyãni || 11 || 107 || 
 
 
Kãriyãni – 12 
Destroying The Kãran Body 
 
12.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Kãrtik  sud  Punam [20
th
 November, 
1820], Swãmi Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  east-facing  rooms  of  Vastã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Kãriyãni.    He  was  wearing  a  white khes and  a 
white dagli made  of chhint.    He  has  also  tied  a  white feto with  a 
bokãni around   His   head.      A sabhã of paramhans,   as   well   as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
12.2
 Then,    Shreeji Mahãrãj  said,  “Please  begin  a  question-answer 
discussion.” 
 
12.3
 Then, the munis asked questions amongst themselves for quite some 
time,  where  the  topic  of  the  three  bodies  of  the jeev (sthul, sukshma, 
and kãran)   and   the   three   bodies   of ishvar (virãt, sutrãtmã and 
avyãkrut) arose. 
 
12.4
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then commented, “The kãran body is the mãyã of the 
jeev.    That  same kãran body  evolves  into  the sthul and sukshma 
bodies.    Therefore,  all  three  bodies –sthul, sukshma,  and kãran – can 
be  said  to  be  the mãyã of  the jeev.    In  the  same  way, virãt, sutrãtmã, 
and avyãkrut can be said to be the mãyã of ishvar. 
 
12.5
 “The kãran body,  the mãyã of  the jeev,  is  attached  so  strongly  to  the 
jeev that   they   cannot   be   separated   by   any   means   whatsoever.  
However,  if  a  person  attains  the  company  of  a sant,  realises  the 
svarup of Bhagvãn through the words of that sant, performs dhyãn on 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 302 - 
the svarup of Bhagvãn, and  takes  in  the  words  of Bhagvãn in  his 
heart, then the kãran body attached to his jeev is burnt completely. 
 
12.6
 “For example, the shell of a tamarind seed is firmly attached to the 
seed.  But, when the seed is roasted over a fire, the shell is burnt and 
then  becomes  detached.    It  can  then  be  peeled  off  easily  by  rubbing 
the  seed  in  your  hands.    Similarly,  when  the kãran body is ‘roasted’ 
by performing dhyãn and following the words of Bhagvãn, it becomes 
separated  from  the jeev just  as  easily  as  when  a  person  rubs  off  the 
shell of a roasted tamarind seed.  However, even if a person were to 
try a million other methods, he would not be able to destroy the jeev’s 
ignorance in the form of the kãran body.”  
 
12.7
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  a  question  to  the munis:  “During the 
jãgrat state, sattva-gun prevails  and  a  person  has  knowledge  of  all 
objects.  In spite of this, when a person hears something in the jãgrat 
state,  it  can  only  be  strengthened  if  he  thinks  of  it  in  the sukshma 
body.    However rajo-gun prevails  in  the sukshma body;  and  during 
the  state  of rajo-gun,  complete  knowledge  is  not  possible.    However, 
in the sukshma body, when a person thinks about what he has heard 
during  the jãgrat state,  it  becomes  complete  knowledge.    How  can 
this apparent contradiction be resolved?” 
 
12.8
 The munis collectively  attempted  to  explain  to  the  best  of  their 
understanding,   but   none   could   provide   an   adequate   answer   to 
Shreeji Mahãrãj’s question.  Therefore, they folded their hands and 
said, “Mahãrãj, this question can only be answered by you.” 
 
12.9
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj thereupon explained, “The answer is that the jeev, 
which  is  the kshetragna,  dwells  within  the  heart.    The kshetragna 
enlightens  the  fourteen indriyas.    Of  these indriyas,  the antah-karans 
dwell  extremely  close  to  the kshetragna.    As  a  result,  whatever a 
person  hears  is  consolidated  when  he  thinks  about  it  in  the antah-
karans.    After  all,  the kshetragna is  more  powerful  than  all  the 
indriyas and the antah-karans, and so whatever it approves becomes 
thoroughly strengthened.” 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 303 - 
12.10
 Having heard this answer, the munis commented, “Mahãrãj, you have 
given  a  precise  answer.    No  one  besides  you  could  have  answered 
that question.” 
 
12.11
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Regardless of how lustful, angry, greedy, 
or rude a person may be, if he listens to these types of talks with faith 
and love, all of his vicious natures would be eradicated.  For example, 
if a man with teeth strong enough to chew raw chick-peas were to eat 
many  sour  mangoes,  he  then  would  not  be  able  to  chew  even  boiled 
rice.    In  that  same  way,  if  a  person,  who  is  strongly  overpowered  by 
vicious natures were to listen to these talks with shraddhã, then that 
person would no longer be capable of indulging in the panch-vishays.  
Moreover, the mind does not become as free of desires for vishays by 
subjecting    the    body    to    strict vrats such    as tapta-kruchhra, 
chãndrãyan,  as  it  does  by  listening  to  these  talks  of Bhagvãn.    In 
addition,   your   minds   must   not   become   stable   while   performing 
dhyãn or  by  turning  a mãlã as  perfectly  as  they  do  while  you  are 
listening to these talks.  Therefore, a person should listen to the talks 
of Purushottam-Nãrãyan with  faith  and  love.    There  is  no  better 
method to stabilise the mind and to free it of the desires for vishays.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Kãriyãni || 12 || 108 || 
 
 
|| End of Shree Kãriyãni Prakaran ||

LOYÃ 
- 304 - 
|| SHREE SWÃMINÃRAYAN VIJAYTETRÃM || 
 
VACHANÃMRUT 
Shree Loyã Prakaran 
 
Loyã – 1 
Anger 
Developing Complete Satsang 
 
1.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Kãrtik  vad 10  [30
th
 November,  1820], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated 
bedstead  in  the  residential  hall  of  the paramhans in Surã Khãchar’s 
darbãr in Loyã.  He was wearing a white, cotton-padded survãl and a 
white dagli made of chhint.  He had also tied a white feto around His 
head.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places, 
had gathered before Him. 
 
1.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked the munis, “What does ‘Shankar’ mean?” 
 
1.3
 The munis replied, “That which gives bliss is called Shankar.” 
 
1.4
 Hearing this answer, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Last night, an hour or two 
before  sunrise, Shivji granted  me  his darshan in  a  dream.    He  was 
seated  on  the  big,  powerful Nandishvar.    His  body  was  of  a  large 
build,    and    he    had    thick,    matted    hair;    he    appeared    to    be 
approximately forty years of age.  Along with Shivji was Pãrvati, who 
was  wearing  all  white  clothes.   Shivji,  like  a  great sãdhu,  appeared 
tranquil,  and  he  showed  great  love  towards  me.    However,  I  did  not 
feel love for him.  This is because I believe, ‘Shiv is a dev that is full of 
tamo-gun,   whereas   I   worship   Shree   Krishna-Nãrãyan   who   is   the 
incarnation of tranquillity’.  Therefore,  I  do  not  have  much  love  for 
devs like Brahmã, Shiv,  and Indra,  who  have rajo-gun and tamo-gun.  
Moreover, I have much hatred towards anger; I do not like angry men 
or angry devs.  Nonetheless, why do I respect Shivji?  I do so because 
he is a tyãgi, a yogi, and a great bhakta of Bhagvãn. 

LOYÃ 
- 305 - 
1.5
 “What is anger like?  Well, it is like a rabid dog.  If the saliva of a rabid 
dog touches a man or an animal, then they suffer and die, just like the 
constantly barking rabid dog.  Similarly, a person infected by saliva in 
the form of anger, suffers like a rabid dog, and falls from the path of a 
sãdhu. 
 
1.6
 “Furthermore, just like a butcher, an Arab, a cruel soldier, a tiger, a 
leopard, and a black snake frighten everyone and kill some, similarly, 
anger frightens all and takes the life of some.  If such anger arises in a 
sãdhu,  it  appears  very  unsuitable;  after  all,  a sãdhu should  be  calm.  
But,  if  anger  were  to  arise,  that sãdhu would  appear  cruel  to  others.  
At  that  time,  the sãdhu’s appearance  would change  since anger  itself 
is ugly.  Therefore, anger makes a person appear ugly.” 
 
1.7
 Then, Shuk Muni asked, “Mahãrãj, if a slight trace of anger arises but 
is then suppressed, is such anger disruptive, or not?” 
 
1.8
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If a snake were to appear in this sabhã at 
this  moment,  then  even  if it  does  not  bite  anyone,  everyone  would 
still have to rise and scatter; there would be panic in everyone’s 
heart.  Furthermore, if a tiger were to come and roar at the outskirts 
of  the  village,  then  even  if  it  does  not  harm  anyone,  all  would  feel 
terror within, and no one would come out of their homes.  Similarly, 
even  if  a  trace  of  anger  were  to  arise,  it  would  still  be  a  source  of 
extreme misery.” 
 
1.9
 Then, Nãnã Nirmanãnand Swãmi asked, “By what means can kãm be 
totally uprooted?” 
 
1.10
 To  this,  Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Kãm is  uprooted  if  a  person  has 
extremely  firmly  realised  himself  to  be  the ãtmã;  and  he  firmly 
follows  the panch-vartmãn,  including  the  vow  of  the  eight  types  of 
brahm-chãrya;   and   he   thoroughly   understands   the   greatness   of 
Bhagvãn.  However, even after the roots of kãm have been eradicated, 

LOYÃ 
- 306 - 
a  person  should  not deviate  from brahm-chãrya and  other niyams in 
any ways.  However, the method for totally uprooting even the most 
vicious form of kãm is to fully understand the greatness of Bhagvãn.” 
 
1.11
 Then,  Bhajanãnand  Swãmi  asked,  “Mahãrãj,  what  are  the 
characteristics  of  the  three  levels  of vairãgya – kanishth, madhyam, 
and uttam?” 
 
1.12
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A person with the kanishth vairãgya is pure 
while  strictly  following  the niyams related  to  the tyãg of  women  as 
described  in  the  Dharma-Shãstras.  But, if he were to see a women’s 
body,  then  his  would  get  attached  to  that  body,  and  he  would  not 
remain stable.  Such a person can be considered to be a person with 
the kanishth vairãgya. 
 
1.13
 “If a person with a madhyam vairãgya were  to  see  a  naked  women, 
no  disturbance  would  arise  in  his  mind,  just  as  he  would  not  be 
disturbed  by  seeing  naked  animals.    Moreover,  his  mind  would  not 
become attached to that woman.  Such a person can be considered to 
be a person with the madhyam vairãgya. 
 
1.14
 “Now, if a person with the uttam vairãgya were  to  come  across 
women  and  other  worldly  objects,  even in  solitude,  he  would  not  be 
tempted.    Such  a  person  can  be  considered  to  be  a  person  with  the 
uttam vairãgya.” 
 
1.15
 Then, Bhajanãnand Swãmi asked again, “What are the characteristics 
for  the  three  levels  of Bhagvãn’s gnãn – kanishth, madhyam,  and 
uttam?” 
 
1.16
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A person with the kanishth gnãn initially 
develops the nishchay in Bhagvãn upon seeing His powers.  However, 
when such powers are not seen in Him, or when nothing unpleasant 
happens  to  an  evil  person  who  slanders Bhagvãn,  then  his nishchay 

LOYÃ 
- 307 - 
would  not  remain.    Such  a  person  can  be  described  to  be  a  person 
with the kanishth gnãn. 
 
1.17
 “If a person with a madhyam gnãn were  to  see  pure  and  impure 
human  actions  of Bhagvãn,  he  would  be  deceived  by  them,  and  his 
nishchay in Bhagvãn would  not  remain.    Such  a  person  can  be 
described to be a person with the madhyam gnãn. 
 
1.18
 “A person  with  the uttam gnãn,  would  not  be  deceived  even  after 
seeing  any  type  of  pure  or  impure  actions  performed  by Bhagvãn, 
and  his nishchay would  not  diminish.    Moreover,  even  if  the  person 
who  initially  convinced  him  of Bhagvãn were  to  say, ‘He  is  not 
Bhagvãn’, he would feel, ‘This person must be mad’.  Such a person can 
be described to be a person with the uttam gnãn. 
 
1.19
 “Of these, the person with the kanishth gnãn becomes siddh after 
countless lives; the person with a madhyam gnãn becomes siddh after 
two  or  three  lives;  and  the  person  with  the uttam gnãn becomes 
siddh in the same life.”  Shreeji Mahãrãj replied in this way. 
 
1.20
 Then,  Motã  Shivãnand  Swãmi  asked,  “Despite  having  complete 
nishchay in Bhagvãn, why does a person not feel fulfilled within?” 
 
1.21
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A person whose antah-karans burns due to 
enemies, such as of kãm, krodh, lobh, svãd, sneh, and mãn, would not 
believe  himself  to  be  fulfilled – even  if  he  does  have nishchay in 
Bhagvãn.” 
 
1.22
 Then,  Nityãnand  Swãmi asked, “What is the method for overcoming 
these enemies?” 
   
1.23
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The enemies are overcome only if a person 
remains  alert  to  harshly  punish  them.    Just  as Dharma-Rãj remains 
ready,  day  and  night,  to  beat  sinners  with  a  stick,  similarly,  if  the 

LOYÃ 
- 308 - 
indriyas behave immorally, then the indriyas should be punished; and 
if  the antah-karans behave  immorally,  then  the antah-karans should 
be  punished.    The indriyas should  be  punished  by  imposing  upon 
them the kruchhra chãndrãyan and other vrats, and the antah-karans 
should  be  punished  through  a  thought  process.    As  a  result,  those 
enemies,  like kãm and krodh,  would  be  defeated.    Then,  by  having 
nishchay in Bhagvãn,  a  person  would  feel  himself  to  be  completely 
fulfilled.” 
 
1.24
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Who can be said to have developed 
complete satsang?” 
 
1.25
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “First of all, such a person has extremely 
firmly  realised  himself  to  be  the ãtmã.    Also,  he  believes  his ãtmã to 
be  absolutely  detached  from  the  body,  the indriyas,  and  the antah-
karans; he does not believe the actions of the body and indriyas to be 
his  own.    Despite  this,  he  does  not  permit  even  a  slight  lapse  in 
following  the panch-vartmãn.    Moreover,  even  though  he  himself 
behaves   as brahm-svarup,   he   does   not   abandon   his   feeling   of 
servitude   towards Purushottam Bhagvãn;   he   faithfully   worships 
Bhagvãn while  maintaining  a  master-servant  relationship  with  Him.  
Furthermore,  he  realises  the pratyaksha murti of Bhagvãn to  be 
absolutely unaffected, like ãkãsh. 
 
1.26
  “That ãkãsh is  interwoven  with  and  pervades  the  other  four bhuts; 
and the actions of the other four bhuts occur within ãkãsh.  Similarly, 
despite  performing  pure  and  impure  actions,  the pratyaksha Shree 
Krishna-Nãrãyan remains  unaffected,  just  like ãkãsh.    Also,  such  a 
person realises the countless powers of this Bhagvãn as follows: ‘This 
Bhagvãn appears to be human for the kalyãn of the jeevs.  But, in fact, 
He is the creator, preserver, and destroyer of countless brahmãnds.  He 
is the lord of Golok, Vaikunth, Shvet-Dvip, Brahmpur, and other dhãms.  
He  is  also  the  lord  of  all  the  countless  akshar-rup muktas’.  With  this 
understanding   of Bhagvãn’s greatness,   he   devoutly   engages   in 

LOYÃ 
- 309 - 
various  forms  of bhakti,  and  in  listening  to  the  talks  of Bhagvãn.    He 
also  serves Bhagvãn’s bhaktas.    When  a  person  behaves  in  this  way, 
his satsang can be said to be complete.” 
 
1.27
 Nãnã Shivãnand Swãmi then asked, “At times, a person understands 
the  greatness  of  a bhakta of Bhagvãn extremely well,  but  at  other 
times, he does not understand it so well.  What is the reason for this?” 
 
1.28
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A sant follows  the  path  of dharma.  
When he sees a person treading the path of adharma, he lectures that 
person.    As  a  result,  a  person  who  identifies  himself  with  the  body 
will not know how to accept the advice positively and, in return, will 
perceive avgun in  the sant,  and  will  have  hatred  towards  the sant.  
Therefore, a person understands the greatness of a sant as long as he 
is  not  lectured  by  him.    Even  when  that  person  is  given  beneficial 
advice  that  may  pain  him,  he  perceives avgun in  the sant,  and  does 
not retain that understanding of the sant’s greatness. 
 
1.29
 “A person who perceives avgun in a sant, is unable to become pure by 
any  form  of prãyshchit.    In  fact,  release  from  the  sins, such  as  lust,  is 
possible,  but  release  from  the  sin  of  insulting  a sant is  not  possible.  
For  example,  if  a  person  contracts  tuberculosis,  no  medicine  would 
be  able  to  cure  the  disease;  he  would  definitely  die.    Similarly,  a 
person  who  perceives avgun in  a sant should  be  known  as  having 
tuberculosis;  he  will  certainly  fall  from satsang sometime  in  the 
future.    Furthermore,  even  if  a  person’s  hands,  feet,  nose,  eyes, 
fingers, and other body parts are severed, he still cannot be described 
as  dead.    However,  when  the  head  is  severed  from  the  body,  he  is 
described  as  dead.    Similarly,  a  person  who  perceives avgun in  a 
bhakta of Bhagvãn,   has   had   his   head   severed.      If   he   lapses   in 
following other vartmãn, then his limbs can be said to be severed – he 
will  still  live.    That  is,  he  will  survive  in satsang.    But,  a  person  who 
has  perceived avgun in  a sant will  certainly,  at  some  time,  fall  from 
satsang.  He should be known to have had his head severed.” 

LOYÃ 
- 310 - 
1.30
 Then, Bhagvadãnand Swãmi asked, “If a person has perceived avgun 
in a bhakta, is there any method to apologise for it, or not?” 
 
1.31
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “There is a solution, but it is extremely 
difficult;  a  person  who  has  intense shraddhã can  do  it.    When avgun 
are  perceived  in  a sant,  a  person  should  think, ‘I have committed a 
great  sin  by  perceiving  avgun  in  a  brahm-svarup  bhakta of Bhagvãn’.  
From  such  thoughts,  he  will  feel  intense  regret  in  his  heart.    As  a 
result  of  such  regret,  while  eating,  he  will  be  unable  to  distinguish 
between  tasty  and  tasteless  food,  and  at  night  he  will  be  unable  to 
sleep.    As  long  as  the avgun of the sant is  not  removed  from  the 
person’s heart, he will continue to experience extreme guilt, just like 
a fish will suffer without water. 
 
1.32
 “On the other hand, when he intensely perceives gun in  that sant, 
then if that sant has been hurt in any way, he would please him with 
absolute humbleness.  If this type of thought remains in a person’s 
heart,  then  even  if  he  has  perceived avgun in  that sant,  they  would 
still  be  overcome,  and  he  would  not  fall  from satsang.    Apart  from 
that, there is no other solution; this is the only solution.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Loyã || 1 || 109 || 
 
 
Loyã – 2 
Faith, Gnãn, Courage, Or Love 
 
2.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Kãrtik  vad 11  [1
st
 December,  1820], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  facing  south  on  a 
decorated  bedstead  in  Surã  Khãchar’s darbãr in   Loyã.      He   was 
wearing  a  red, kinkhãb survãl and  a  black, kinkhãb dagli with  the 
word ‘Nar-Nãrãyan’ imprinted upon it.  Around His head, he had tied 
a sky-blue coloured feto with golden threads along the edges, from a 
town  called  Burãnpur.    He  had  also  tied  an  orange feto around  His 

LOYÃ 
- 311 - 
waist.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places, 
had  gathered  before  Him.    Muktãnand  Swãmi  and  other paramhans 
were singing kirtans to the accompaniment of a dukad, sarodã, satãr, 
and manjirã. 
 
2.2
 After the singing had concluded, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “O paramhans, 
please listen.  I wish to ask you a question.” 
 
2.3
 The munis said, “Mahãrãj, please ask.” 
 
2.4
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “In this satsang,  when  does  a bhakta 
become free from the fear of death and become convinced of his own 
kalyãn in this very life?” 
 
2.5
 Muktãnand Swãmi replied as best as he could, but was unable to give 
a   precise   answer   to   Shreeji  Mahãrãj’s  question.    So,  the  other 
paramhans requested,  “Mahãrãj,  you  will  have  to  answer  that 
question.” 
 
2.6
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  began,  “While  you  were  singing kirtans,   I 
thought  about  this.    In  my  mind,  I  feel  that  there  are  four  types  of 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn who   no   longer   fear   death   and   who   feel 
completely  fulfilled.    These  four  types  are:    first,  a  person  who  has 
faith;  second,  a  person  with gnãn;  third,  a  person  with  courage;  and 
fourth,  a  person  with  love.    These  four  types  of bhaktas do  not  fear 
death, and they feel fulfilled while still alive. 
 
2.7
 “I  shall  now  describe  the  characteristics  of  these  four  types  of 
bhaktas.  A bhakta who has faith, has established absolute faith in the 
words  of Bhagvãn and  His sant.    Therefore,  by  the  strength  of  his 
faith  in Bhagvãn,  he  does  not  fear  death.    Also,  he  believes, ‘I have 
attained  the  pratyaksha  Purushottam  Bhagvãn,  and  therefore  I  am 
fulfilled’. 
 

LOYÃ 
- 312 - 
2.8
 “A bhakta with gnãn,  has  the  strength  of ãtmã-gnãn,  and  believes, ‘I 
am  brahm-svarup  and  a  bhakta  of Bhagvãn’.  Therefore,  he  too  does 
not fear death. 
 
2.9
 “All the indriyas and antah-karans tremble with fear before a bhakta 
who  has  courage.    Also,  he  is  not  afraid  of  anyone.    So,  he  does  not 
disobey  any  of Bhagvãn’s ãgnã in  any  way.    As  a  result,  he  believes 
himself  to  be  fulfilled  and  does  not  have  even  the  slightest  fear  of 
death. 
 
2.10
 “The fourth, who has love, has the nature of a pati-vratã wife.    The 
vrutti of  a pati-vratã wife  is  not  drawn  to  anyone  except  her  own 
husband,  and  she  has  love  only  for her  husband.    Similarly,  this 
bhakta of Bhagvãn,  like  a pati-vratã,  has  love  only  for  his  master, 
Bhagvãn.  As a result, he believes himself to be fulfilled and does not 
have even the slightest fear of death. 
 
2.11
 “Out  of  these  four  types  of  characteristics,   even   if   only   one   is 
predominant and the other three are minor, a person still overcomes 
the fear of births and deaths.  But if a person does not have any one of 
the four, then his fear of death is not overcome.” 
 
2.12
 Having  said  this,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj asked  all  the paramhans and  other 
bhaktas,  “Of  these  four,  please  declare  which  characteristic  is 
predominant  within  you.”    So,  all  the paramhans and bhaktas 
described  whichever  characteristic  was  predominant  within  them.  
Hearing this, Shreeji Mahãrãj was very pleased. 
 
2.13
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj continued, “Of these four types, all those who 
have  the  characteristic  of  courage  may  come  near  and  bow  down  at 
my feet.”  Those who had the characteristic of courage, placed Shreeji 
Mahãrãj’s holy feet on their chests and bowed down before Him. 
 
2.14
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Those who wish to ask a question, please 
ask.” 

LOYÃ 
- 313 - 
2.15
 Brahmãnand Swãmi then asked, “That which is the cause should be 
greater  than  its  effect.    Why,  then  does  a  large  tree  arise  from  the 
small seed of a banyan tree?” 
 
2.16
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A cause may be small and subtle, yet it is 
still  capable of  producing  a  vast  effect – that  is  the  very  greatness  of 
the cause.  For example, the entities evolved from Mul-Prakruti – the 
countless Pradhãns – occupy an immense region, whereas the cause – 
Mul-Prakruti – has  the svarup of  a  female.    In  the  same  way,  smell, 
which  is  the  cause  of pruthvi,  is  subtle,  whereas  the  entity  evolved 
from  it, pruthvi,  is  large.    Similarly, ãkãsh and  the  other  four bhuts 
occupy  a  vast  area,  but  their  causes,  such  as  sound  and  touch,  are 
subtle.  Therefore, the cause may be small, but it still has the ability to 
produce a vast effect; this is its capability. 
 
2.17
 “For example, Agni-Dev possesses a svarup like that of a man; and his 
size  is  like  that  of  a  man;  but  his  effect  (flames  of  fire)  is  large.  
Similarly,  the svarup of Varun-Dev is  the  size  of  a man,  but  his  effect 
(water)  is  very  abundant.    Also,  the svarup of Surya is  seated  in  a 
chariot  like  a  man,  but  his  effect – light – pervades  the  entire 
brahmãnd.    In  the  same  way,  the  cause  of  all, Shree Purushottam-
Nãrãyan is the size of a man, yet He is the cause of countless millions 
of brahmãnds.    But,  a  person  who  is  a  fool  thinks, ‘If the effect is this 
big, then the cause must be so much bigger!’  Actually,  this  is  the 
understanding of a fool. 
 
2.18
 “Bhagvãn, who is the cause of all, appears like a human being; yet by 
His  extraordinary  powers,  He  is  able  to  create countless  millions  of 
brahmãnds from  His  body  and  is  able  to  absorb  them  back  into 
Himself.  For example, Agni, Varun, and Surya appear vast in the form 
of    their    effects,    but    they    withdraw    their    effect    back    within 
themselves, and only they remain.  In the same way, within each and 
every  hair  of Bhagvãn,  countless brahmãnds,  each  composed  of  the 
eight barriers (jad prakruti) and fourteen loks appear as mere atoms.  

LOYÃ 
- 314 - 
In  this  way,  the  cause  is  magnificent  and  full  of  greatness.    So,  a 
person  who  is  wise  realises, ‘Bhagvãn appears like a human, but, in 
fact, He is the cause of all and the creator of all; He is all-powerful’.” 
 
2.19
 Having said this, Shreeji Mahãrãj returned to go to sleep. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Loyã || 2 || 110 || 
 
 
Loyã – 3 
Nishchay In Bhagvãn And The Knowledge Of His Greatness 
 
3.1
 In the Samvat year 1877, on the night of Kãrtik vad 13 [3
rd
 December, 
1820],  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  in  Surã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Loyã.    He  was  wearing  a  white dagli made  of 
chhint and  a  white,  cotton-padded survãl.    He  had  also  tied  a  white 
feto around His head, and covered Himself with a white pachhedi.  A 
sabhã of munis, as well as satsangis from various places, had gathered 
before Him. 
 
3.2
 Then,  Bhagvadãnand  Swãmi  and  Shivãnand  Swãmi  asked  Shreeji 
Mahãrãj, “What are the characteristics of a person who has nishchay 
in Bhagvãn and   His sant coupled   with   the   knowledge   of   their 
greatness?” 
 
3.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “What would a person who has nishchay in 
Bhagvãn and His sant coupled with the knowledge of their greatness 
not  do  for  the  sake  of Bhagvãn and  His sant?    For  them,  he  would 
leave   his   family,   give   up   any   fear   of   public   ridicule,   give   up   a 
kingdom, give up pleasures, give up wealth, leave his wife, and in the 
case of a woman, she would leave her husband.” 
 
3.4
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  narrated  the  stories  of  the  following bhaktas:  
Rajput    Galuji    of    the    village    Dadusar;    Kushal-Kunvar-Bãi    of 
Dharmapur;  Parvat-Bhãi;  Rãjbai;  Jeevu-Bã;  Lãdu-Bã;  Motã  Rãmbai; 

LOYÃ 
- 315 - 
Dãdã  Khãchar;  Mãnchã  Bhakta;  Mulji  Brahm-Chãri;  Lãdhi-Bãi  and 
Mãtãji  of  Bhuj;  Muktãnand  Swãmi;  Sãmat  Patel,  an  Ãhir  from  the 
Vãlãk  region;  Mulji  and  Krishnaji  of  the  village  Mankuvã;  the  two 
Kãthi bhatkas of  the  village  Gundãli  in  the  Vãlãk region;  and  other 
satsangis.    Mahãrãj  described  in  detail  whatever  they  had  done  for 
the sake of Bhagvãn and His sant. 
 
3.5
 Then, He added, “A person who has nishchay in Bhagvãn coupled 
with   knowledge   of   His   greatness,   never   disobeys   the   words   of 
Bhagvãn; he  does  as Bhagvãn says.”  Having said this, He asked, 
“What was my nature like?  Well, I was such a tyãgi that I could stay 
in  one  place  as  long  as  the  time  interval  between  the  morning  and 
evening  milking  of  cows,  not  any  longer.    I  had  intense vairãgya.  
Moreover,  I  had  deep  love  for  Rãmãnand  Swãmi.    Therefore,  when 
Swãmi  sent  a  message  from  the  city  of  Bhuj  via  Mayãram  Bhatt, 
saying, ‘If you desire to stay in satsang, you will have to stay by 
embracing  its  pillar’.  I  literally  embraced  a  pillar.    Seeing  this, 
Mayãrãm  Bhatt  said, ‘You should live according to Muktãnand Swãmi 
for  nine  months.  So,  a  person  who  has  the  previously  mentioned 
nishchay in Bhagvãn and   His sant can   also   be   known   by   this 
characteristic.”  Shreeji Mahãrãj then narrated the stories of Sundarji 
Suthãr and Dosã Vãniyã. 
 
3.6
 After  mentioning  that  a  person  who  has  such nishchay in Bhagvãn 
and  His sant has  constant  enthusiasm,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  narrated  the 
story of Rãnã Rãjgar. 
 
3.7
 Next, Shreeji Mahãrãj narrated the story of Prahlãd:  “Prahlãd said to 
Nrusinhji, ‘Mahãrãj, I am not afraid of this terrifying svarup of yours.  
Moreover,  I  do  not  consider  your  protection  of  me  as  true  protection.  
Instead, when you save me from my enemy’s army (the indriyas), I shall 
consider  that  to  be  true protection’.  Therefore,  a bhakta of Bhagvãn 
would  not  be  overjoyed  if Bhagvãn were  to  protect  him  physically; 

LOYÃ 
- 316 - 
and he would not be disappointed if he were not protected.  Instead, 
he would remain carefree and continue to worship Bhagvãn. 
 
3.8
 “Moreover, he would intensely understand the greatness of Bhagvãn 
and  His sant.”  Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj narrated the story of the old 
lady from the village Kathlãl. 
 
3.9
 Continuing,  He  said,  “Even  if  such  a bhakta – with nishchay in 
Bhagvãn and His sant coupled with the knowledge of their greatness 
– were to die painfully; or if a tiger were to devour him; or if a snake 
were to bite him; or if a weapon were to strike him; or if he were to 
drown  in  water;  or  if  he  were  to  die  in  any  other  horrific  way;  he 
would   still   believe, ‘A  bhakta  of  Bhagvãn  never  suffers  from  an 
unpleasant outcome; he will certainly attain the dhãm of Bhagvãn.  On 
the  other  hand,  even  if  a  vimukh  were  to  die  naturally  and  were  to  be 
cremated  in  a  funeral  pyre  with  sandalwood  and  the full  funeral  rites, 
he will certainly go to Yampuri’.  He would understand the difference 
between the two extremely clearly. 
 
310
 “So, a person who develops such firm belief in his heart should be 
known  as having nishchay in Bhagvãn and  His sant coupled  with  the 
knowledge  of  their  greatness.    A  person  with  such nishchay will 
definitely  reach Brahm-Mahol;  he  would  not  reside  in  any  other 
lower dhãm.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Loyã || 3 || 111 || 
 
 
Loyã – 4 
A Person With Doubts 
 
4.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Kãrtik  vad 14  [4
th
 December,  1820], 
three  hours  after  sunrise,  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was 
sitting in Surã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Loyã.    He  was  wearing  a  white 

LOYÃ 
- 317 - 
survãl and  a  white dagli made  of chhint.    He  had  also  tied  a  white 
pãgh around His head.  A sabhã of paramhans, as well as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
4.2
 Then,  Akhandãnand  Swãmi  asked  Shreeji  Mahãrãj,  “There  are 
countless millions of brahmãnds.  In those brahmãnds, does the murti 
of Bhagvãn appear  the  same  as  the murti in  this brahmãnd at  this 
present time, or not?” 
 
4.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Bhagvãn always resides in His Akshardhãm.  
From the countless Pradhãn-Purush pairs that evolve from Mul-Mãyã, 
countless  millions  of brahmãnds evolve.    Then,  for  the  sake  of  His 
bhaktas,  while  still  residing  at  one  location  in  His Akshardhãm,  and 
by  His  own  wish,  that Bhagvãn appears  in  countless svarups in  the 
countless millions of brahmãnds.” 
 
4.4
 Again, Akhandãnand Swãmi asked, “Shree  Krishna-Nãrãyan always 
has  a  human svarup,  and  the svarup of Bhagvãn is  forever satya.  
However,  that  same Bhagvãn appears  sometimes  as Matsya, Kurma, 
Varãh, Nrusinh,  and  other  countless svarups.    How  should  this  be 
understood?    Furthermore,  is  the  method  of kalyãn and  the murti of 
Bhagvãn in each brahmãnd the same, or different?” 
 
4.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The murti of Bhagvãn is  always  the  same.  
Even then, by His own wish, Bhagvãn shows His murti wherever and 
in   whatever murti is   required.      He   also   reveals   His   powers   to 
whatever extent is appropriate in various places.  He always has two 
arms,  but  by  His  wish,  at  times  He  appears  with  four  arms,  or  eight 
arms, or even countless arms.  He also appears in svarups like Matsya 
and Kurma.    In  this  way,  He  incarnates  in  whichever svarup is 
appropriate for the place.  However, He always resides in His dhãm in 
one svarup. 
 

LOYÃ 
- 318 - 
4.6
 “Furthermore,  while  remaining  in  one location,  He pervades  the 
countless  millions  of brahmãnds through  His antaryãmi svarup.    For 
example, Vyãsji was  one,  but  when  he  called  out  to  Shukji,  he  did  so 
by  residing  in  all  the sthãvar and jangam beings.    When  Shukji 
replied, he did so in the same way.  In this way, even great yogis like 
Shukji are  capable  of  pervading  the  entire  world.    Such  people  have 
attained   such   extraordinary   powers   as   rewards   of   worshipping 
Bhagvãn.  But, Purushottam Bhagvãn, who is called Yogeshvar, is the 
master  of  all  extraordinary  powers.    So,  while  still  remaining  in  one 
location, what is surprising about Him incarnating, by His own wish, 
wherever  and  however  is  appropriate?    What  is  so  surprising  about 
Bhagvãn possessing  such  abilities?    People  become  astonished  even 
when  a  magician  displays  simple  illusions,  and  they  cannot  fully 
comprehend  the  magic.    But, Bhagvãn possesses  all  extraordinary 
powers  and  is  the  greatest  source  of  wonder.    So,  how  can  the jeev 
know Him? 
 
4.7
 “The  Shreemad  Bhãgvat  mentions, ‘This  many  have  overcome 
Bhagvãn’s mãyã’.  However,  it  also  mentions, ‘No one has overcome 
the force of Bhagvãn’s mãyã’.  Here,  a  person  should realise  that  if 
even   those   like Brahmã were   to   doubt Bhagvãn’s extraordinary 
powers,  then  they  cannot  be  said  to  have  overcome  the  power  of 
Bhagvãn’s mãyã.    What  is  this  doubt?    It  is  the  thought, ‘Why does 
Bhagvãn  behave  like  that?’  On   the   other   hand,   a person   who 
understands ‘Bhagvãn is  extremely  powerful;  so  whatever  He  does  is 
appropriate’, is said to have overcome mãyã. 
 
4.8
 “In reality, the method for kalyãn is  the same;  but because  there  are 
three  levels  in  the  people  who  worship  (uttam, madhyam, kanishth), 
and  because  there  are  countless  levels  in  their shraddhã,  there  are 
many differences in the path of kalyãn taken by people.  However, in 
reality,  there  is  only  one  path  of kalyãn.    After  all,  there  is  only  one 
svarup of Bhagvãn.  This Bhagvãn is extremely powerful and no one, 
including Akshar,   is   capable   of   becoming   like   Him.      This   is   an 
established principle.” 

LOYÃ 
- 319 - 
4.9
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi said to Shreeji Mahãrãj, “Today, Jhinã-Bhãi 
has become very upset, and he said that since Mahãrãj did not come 
to my house, what is the point of me staying in that house?” 
 
4.10
 Hearing this, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “When a person loves by force and 
with unhappiness, that love does not survive for very long.  Also, the 
bhakti and  love  of  a  person  who  is  unhappy,  is  ultimately  abolished.  
Therefore, it is a great mistake to wear a sad face due to displeasure.” 
 
4.11
 Jhinã-Bhãi then said, “When Bhagvãn and His sant come to a person’s 
house, his face should glow with delight; but when they do not come, 
his  face  should definitely  reflect  disappointment  and  he  should  feel 
sorrow in his heart.” 
 
4.12
 Hearing  this  remark,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “A  person  should  be 
pleased  when Bhagvãn and  His sãdhus  come,  but  he  should  never 
grieve.      If   his   nature   is   to   grieve,   then   ultimately,   something 
misfortunate  is  bound  to  occur.    Therefore,  while  following  his  own 
dharma,  a  person  should  happily  follow Bhagvãn’s  ãgnã,  but  he 
should  never  become  upset  in  order  to  get his own  way.   If Bhagvãn 
issues  an ãgnã to  go  somewhere  and  the  person  becomes  disturbed 
out   of   grief,   then   the darshan and prasãd previously   given   by 
Bhagvãn,  the  countless  types  of  talks  relating  to gnãn,  and  all  other 
actions by which he had felt happiness, are all lost.  Furthermore, due 
to  the  disturbance,  only tamo-gun spreads  throughout  the  mind.  
Therefore, he goes where he is asked to go in a state of pure misery.  
Then,  as  a  result  of  the  distress,  he  cannot  carry  out  the ãgnã 
completely.    Therefore,  a bhakta of Bhagvãn should  remain  ever 
joyful and should worship Bhagvãn with a cheerful mind.  Moreover, 
however  unpleasant  his  circumstances  may  be,  he  should  not  allow 
even the slightest trace of depression to enter his heart.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Loyã || 4 || 112 || 
 

LOYÃ 
- 320 - 
Loyã – 5 
Controlling The Indriyas And The Antah-Karans 
 
5.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on  the  night  of Kãrtik  vad  Amãs [5
th
 
December,  1820],  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  in 
Surã Khãchar’s darbãr in Loyã.  He was wearing a white survãl and a 
white dagli made of chhint.  He had also tied a white pãgh around His 
head.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various 
places, had gathered before Him. 
 
5.2
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  all  the paramhans, “By revealing which 
thoughts  can  a  person  be  considered  to  be honest,  and  by  not 
revealing   which   thoughts   can   a   person   be   considered   to   be 
deceitful?” 
 
5.3
 As  the paramhans were  unable  to  answer,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied, 
“Any weakness in following the panch-vartmãn,  which  cannot  be 
overcome by a thought process, should be revealed before a sant who 
has  no  such  weaknesses.    If  a  person  has  perceived avgun in  a sant, 
that   should   also   be   revealed.      Furthermore,   any   doubts   in   his 
nishchay in Bhagvãn should  also  be  revealed.    Only  then  can  he  be 
considered  to  be  honest.    If  any  of  these  internal  thoughts  have 
arisen,  and  they  are  not  revealed  before  a sant,  then  such  a  person 
should be known to be deceitful.” 
 
5.4
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  another  question:    “If  a  person  is 
deceitful, and also cunning, how can he be recognised?” 
 
5.5
 Again, the paramhans were unable to answer. 
 
5.6
 So, Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “His deceitfulness can be recognised by 
keeping  his  company;  and  while  staying  with  him,  by  observing  him 
while  he  eats,  drinks,  sits,  stands,  walks,  and  talks.   Also,  when 
separated  from  him,  if  another  person  is  asked  to  secretly  observe 
him, then his deceitfulness would be recognised.” 

LOYÃ 
- 321 - 
5.7
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then posed another question:  “Suppose there is a 
person  who  follows  the vartmãn and  keeps nishchay in Bhagvãn out 
of pretence.  He is intelligent and arrogant, and he shows his nishchay 
and  his  observance  of  the vartmãn to  be  more  superior  than  the 
genuine vartmãn and nishchay of others.  So, how can a person’s false 
nishchay and observance of vartmãn be recognised?” 
 
5.8
 Once again, the paramhans were unable to answer the question. 
 
5.9
 So, Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “His pretence can be recognised when his 
reputation is insulted.  Otherwise, it cannot be recognised.” 
 
5.10
 Again, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Which thought  causes  a  person  to 
deflect  from  his nishchay in Bhagvãn and  observance  of vartmãn?  
Which  type  of  thought  would  not  cause  a  person  to  deflect  from 
them?    Also,  if  there  is  a  time  span,  for  what  duration  must  these 
thoughts remain in order to deflect a person from his dharma and his 
nishchay in Bhagvãn?” 
 
5.11
 Again, the paramhans were unable to answer. 
 
5.12
 So,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “If  a  person  attempts  to  eradicate  an 
improper  thought  related  to dharma,  but  the  thought  still  remains; 
or, if such a thought does not arise for fifteen days or for a month, but 
arises  someday  suddenly – then  such  a  thought  would  cause  him  to 
fall   from dharma.    The  same  applies  to  a  person’s nishchay in 
Bhagvãn.    However,  any  thought  which  is  eradicated  by  applying  a 
thought process once it arises, and which does not arise again, would 
not cause a person to fall from his dharma or his nishchay.” 
 
5.13
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Whose foundation in satsang becomes 
solid, and whose does not?” 
 
5.14
 Once again, the paramhans could not answer. 

LOYÃ 
- 322 - 
5.15
 So, Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Dattãtrey perceived  the gun of the  five 
mahã-bhuts, the moon, various animals, a prostitute, a virgin, his own 
body,  and  many  others.    Similarly,  if  a  person  has  the  nature  of 
perceiving  the gun of  a sãdhu,  his foundation  in satsang will  become 
solid.    If  a  person  does  not  have  such  a  nature  then  even  though  he 
remains in satsang, his foundation is not firm.” 
 
5.16
 Again, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Can the indriyas and the antah-karans 
in  a  person  be  completely  controlled  by  the  company  of  the sant,  by 
reading  the shãstras,  and  by  applying his  own  thought  process?    Or 
can they be controlled if only one of these three is present?  If you say 
that  all  three  must  be  present,  then  what  methods  should  be  learnt 
from  a sant,  what  methods  should  be  learnt  from  the shãstras,  and 
how  would a  person  apply  his  own  thought  process?    Please  explain 
this.” 
 
5.17
 Again, the paramhans were unable to answer. 
 
5.18
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “From the shãstras, a person should 
realise  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn and  His sant.    From  the sant,  a 
person   should   learn   methods   for   controlling   the indriyas.      For 
example, a person’s vision should be kept fixed on the nose in this 
way,  and  he  should  not  listen  to  worldly  talks.    These  and  other 
methods should be learnt from a sant.  By his own thought process, a 
person  should  look  positively  upon  the  methods  taught  by  the sant, 
as being for his own kalyãn.  Then, he should behave accordingly.  In 
this  way,  the indriyas and antah-karans can  be  overcome  by  these 
three methods.” 
 
5.19
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj posed another question, “Are the antah-karans 
controlled  by  controlling  the indriyas,  or  are  the indriyas controlled 
by controlling the antah-karans?” 
 
5.20
 Since the paramhans could not answer the question, Shreeji Mahãrãj 
replied, “If a person controls  the  physical indriyas by  physical tap, 
and  then  even  after  the  physical indriyas have  been  controlled,  if  he 

LOYÃ 
- 323 - 
still  firmly  follows  the niyams of  the panch-vartmãn,  then  the antah-
karans can be controlled by controlling the physical indriyas.  So, the 
physical indriyas cannot   be   controlled   by   controlling   the antah-
karans alone.      However,   the antah-karans can   be   controlled   by 
controlling  the  physical indriyas.    How  is  that?    Well,  if  a  person 
controls  the  physical indriyas and  does  not  let  them  indulge  in  the 
vishays,  then  the antah-karans within  would  become  frustrated  and 
would think, ‘This type of enjoyment is not going to be possible in this 
life’.’’ 
 
5.21
 After this, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “By what method are the physical 
indriyas controlled   and   by   what   method   are   the antah-karans 
controlled?” 
 
5.22
 Again,   since   the paramhans could   not   answer,   Shreeji   Mahãrãj 
replied, “The physical indriyas can  be  controlled  by  following  the 
niyams specified  for  a tyãgi in  the  Dharma-Shãstras;  by  controlling 
the  diet;  by  following vrat like tapta-kruchhra and chãndrãyan;  by 
deliberately  tolerating  cold,  heat,  hunger,  and  thirst;  by  engaging  in 
the kathã,  talks,  and kirtans of Bhagvãn;  by  engaging  in bhajan and 
smaran;  by  controlling  the  posture;  and  by  many  other  spiritual 
activities.  The antah-karans of a person can be controlled by thinking 
of Bhagvãn’s greatness,  by  performing dhyãn upon Bhagvãn,  and  by 
realising himself to be the ãtmã.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Loyã || 5 || 113 || 
 
 
Loyã – 6 
Purifying The Company A Person Keeps 
The Difficulties Of Becoming An Ekãntik Bhakta 
 
6.1
 In   the Samvat year   1877,   on   the   night   of Mãgshar   sud 1   [6
th
 
December,  1820],  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  in  Surã  Khãchar’s 
darbãr in Loyã.  He was wearing a white khes and a white dagli made 

LOYÃ 
- 324 - 
of chhint.  He had also tied a white feto around His head and had tied 
a bokãni with  another feto.    The chhoglu of  the  white feto was 
hanging  from  His  head.    In  addition  to  this,  He  had  covered  Himself 
with  a chãdar.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
6.2
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  the paramhans, “After joining satsang, 
what do you consider to be the most difficult achievement?” 
 
6.3
 The paramhans could  not  answer  the  question,  so  Shreeji  Mahãrãj 
replied, “For a person to become ekãntik is extremely difficult.  What 
is this state of being ekãntik?  Well, it is to do bhakti of Bhagvãn along 
with dharma, gnãn, and vairãgya.  That is the state of being ekãntik.” 
 
6.4
 Again, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Which one activity related to dharma 
is such that if it is practiced, all aspects of dharma remain?  Moreover, 
out  of bhajan, smaran,  singing  or  listening  to kirtans,  listening  to 
talks,  and  other  spiritual  activities,  which  one  activity,  if  it  is  kept 
even when all others are abandoned in difficult times, helps maintain 
all of the others?” 
 
6.5
 Shreeji   Mahãrãj answered  His  own  question:    “Of  the  activities 
related to dharma, if a person maintains the vow of nishkãm, all other 
activities  will  develop.    Of  the  spiritual  activities,  if  a  person  keeps 
nishchay in Bhagvãn, then all of the others will develop.” 
 
6.6
 Again, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Which type of thinking, if maintained 
constantly,  is  beneficial;  and  if  altered,  is  destructive?    Also,  which 
type  of  thinking  is  beneficial  if  repeatedly  altered,  and  destructive  if 
not altered?” 
 
6.7
 Again,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  answered  His  own  question:    “Thoughts 
regarding a person’s nishchay in Bhagvãn should never be altered.  It 
is  beneficial  if  they  are  repeatedly  reinforced  by  listening  to  the 
greatness  of Bhagvãn.    Conversely,  repeatedly  altering  them  would 
be  destructive.    However,  if  a  person  has  firmly  decided  in  his  own 

LOYÃ 
- 325 - 
mind, ‘I  want  to  do  this’,   then   that   type   of   thinking   should   be 
repeatedly  altered  on  the  advice  of  a sãdhu.    If  the sãdhu suggests, 
‘You should not sit here and should not do this’,  then  a  person  should 
not sit there and should not do that.  If his own decision is altered, it 
would be beneficial; if it is not altered and he does as he pleases, then 
that would be destructive.” 
 
6.8
 Again, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “By sitting with and listening to which 
type of satsangi or paramhans would make him subject to developing 
faults, despite the fact that he follows dharma?” 
 
6.9
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If a person has nishchay in Bhagvãn and 
follows dharma,  but  also  believes  himself  to  be  the  body  and  has 
pride as well as desires for worldly activities, then if Bhagvãn and His 
sant criticise  these,  he  will  definitely  perceive avgun in Bhagvãn and 
His sant.    Then,  he  will  talk  about  the  perceived avgun of Bhagvãn 
and  His sant to  others,  and  cause  them  to  become  like  a vimukh.    A 
bhakta should not associate with such a person in any way; doing so 
is harmful.” 
 
6.10
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Which type of sãdhu,  even  though  he 
follows dharma and  has nishchay in Bhagvãn,  should  a  person  not 
accompany to bathe, sleep near, or hear talks from?” 
 
6.11
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  answered  His  own  question:    “A sãdhu who 
discouragingly says, ‘Can the vow of nishkãm and other qualities really 
be  attained  in  one  life?    They  are  attained  only  by  the  grace  of 
Bhagvãn;  otherwise  kalyãn  is  attained  after  countless  lives.    So,  can 
kalyãn truly be attained in this very life?’  A  person  should  shun  the 
company    of    anyone    who    speaks    such    discouraging    words.  
Conversely, someone else claims, ‘We are fulfilled in this very life.  The 
force  of  kãm,  krodh,  mad,  matsar,  mãn,  and  other  vicious  natures  is 
small.  By the grace of Bhagvãn and His sant, we will destroy them all’.  
A  person  should,  by  all  means,  seek  the  company  of  a sãdhu who 
speaks in this way and is eagerly engaged in methods to destroy the 
vicious natures.” 

LOYÃ 
- 326 - 
6.12
 Again, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Which type of sãdhu, even if he speaks 
encouragingly, should be shunned?” 
 
6.13
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered His own question:  “If a sãdhu emphasises 
his  own  efforts  only  and  believes  himself  to  be  fulfilled  by  his  own 
efforts,  but  does  not  acknowledge  the  strength  of Bhagvãn and  does 
not feel, ‘By acting in this way, I want to please Bhagvãn’, then such a 
sãdhu should be shunned.” 
 
6.14
 Again, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Which type of sãdhu should  a  person 
keep  the  company  of,  and  which  type  should  a  person  not  keep  the 
company of?” 
 
6.15
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then replied, “If we are staying with a sãdhu who 
follows  the vartmãn strictly  and  has  firm nishchay in Bhagvãn,  but 
instead of lecturing us, he pampers us and lets us have our way, then 
even  if  he  is  considered  great  in  public  opinion,  like  Muktãnand 
Swãmi, his company should not be kept.  On the other hand, if a sãdhu 
repeatedly  lectures  a  person,  and  maintains  constant  awareness  on 
any svabhãv he  sees  within  him;  and  if  he  does  not  stop  criticising 
that svabhãv until it is overcome, and does not compliment him, then 
even if he is not considered great in public view, a person should still 
keep his company.” 
 
6.16
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked another question:  “Suppose a sãdhu 
possesses  all  the  glorious  qualities  like bhakti and gnãn.    However, 
due to which one vicious flaw, should a person avoid his company?” 
  
6.17
 Again, Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If he is very lazy, sleeps too much, 
and  when  told  by  others to  bathe,  perform dhyãn, or  to  follow  other 
niyams, says, ‘I’ll do it later, what’s the hurry?  I’ll do them slowly’, then 
even  though  he  may  appear  to  be  good,  a  person  should  avoid  his 
company.” 
 
6.18
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  another  question:  “A sãdhu may  speak  well; 
but, due to which fault in his speech should his talks not be heard?” 

LOYÃ 
- 327 - 
6.19
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then replied, “Out of arrogance, if he talks about the 
bhakti, gnãn, vairãgya, and dharma within himself to be superior; and 
shows the gun of bhakti, gnãn, vairãgya, and dharma in other sãdhus 
to be inferior, then a person should not listen to his talks.” 
 
6.20
 Once again, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Which type of speech should be 
viewed as amrut even though it is harsh?” 
 
6.21
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj replied, “The words of a sãdhu who  in  his  speech 
criticises  his  own  parents,  sister,  brother,  and varna,  and ãshram 
with  harsh  words,  should  be  known  to  be  good.    This  is  because  a 
person  who  hears  those  words  realises  the  qualities  of  that sãdhu, 
and  thinks: ‘In no way does this sãdhu have attachment to his bodily 
relations’.  Therefore, those words should be enjoyed like amrut.” 
 
6.22
 Shreeji Mahãrãj posed another question, “When should a person 
maintain pride, and when should a person not maintain pride?” 
 
6.23
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered once again:  “A person should not maintain 
pride before a devoted follower of Bhagvãn, even though he may be a 
simple  and  humble haribhakta.    On  the  other  hand,  a  person  should 
certainly  maintain  pride  before a  person  who  has  fallen  back  from 
satsang.  In fact, a person should not become suppressed by him; and 
in  any  question-answer  exchange,  his  words  should  be  answered 
with harsh words.” 
 
6.24
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “When should a person have a desire 
for  the darshan of Bhagvãn and  His sant?    When  should  he  not  have 
such a desire?” 
 
6.25
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Suppose I were to ask all the sãdhus, ‘Who 
will go to Burãnpur and Kãshi?’  Then, when no one speaks, someone 
should rise in the sabhã and say to me, ‘Mahãrãj, if you say so, I shall 
go’.  So  saying,  he  should  follow  my ãgnã and  go  there.    In  those 

LOYÃ 
- 328 - 
situations, to gain my happiness, a person should not keep any desire 
for keeping the company of sant or my darshan. 
 
6.26
 “Moreover,  when  a  person – who   a sãdhu or   I   have   criticised, 
lectured,  insulted,  or  expelled,  and  who  is  crying  out  of  shock – is 
approached by an ekadmal vimukh who starts to talk about the avgun 
of  the sãdhu or  me,  then  before  him,  the  person  should  reveal 
tremendous  love  towards the sãdhu and Bhagvãn.    He  should  say, ‘I 
am  his  servant,  and  even  if  he  were  to  cut  me  to  pieces,  I  still  would 
never perceive avgun in him.  He will grant me kalyãn’.    In  that 
situation, he should reveal great love.” 
 
6.27
 Again,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked, “What should not be done, even if 
Bhagvãn is  pleased  by  it?    What  should  be  done,  even  if Bhagvãn is 
displeased by it?” 
 
6.28
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered His own questions:  “If I were to give an 
order  which  seems  to  be  full  of adharma,  then  a  person  should  be 
hesitant  in  following  it;  he  should  take  some  time  and  not  accept  it 
immediately.    For  example, Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn ordered  Arjun, 
‘Cut off Ashvatthãmã’s head’.  But,  Arjun  did  not  follow  that ãgnã.  
Likewise,  even  if  I  am  pleased  by  it,  that  type  of  instruction  should 
not be followed.  Also, an instruction by which the prescribed niyams 
of the panch-vartmãn are disobeyed should not be followed.  If by not 
obeying  these  two  types  of ãgnã, Bhagvãn is displeased,  then  a 
person  should  definitely  let  Him  be  displeased;  in  those  cases,  a 
person should not attempt to please Him.” 
 
6.29
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  again,  “While  performing dhyãn upon 
Bhagvãn,  countless  different  waves  of  vicious  thoughts  arises  in the 
mind, just as large waves arise in the ocean.  When such thoughts do 
arise, how can they be suppressed?” 
 

LOYÃ 
- 329 - 
6.30
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered His own question:  “When such vicious 
thoughts  arise,  a  person  should  stop  the dhyãn,  and  should  clap  and 
chant ‘Swãminarayan, Swãminarayan’ loudly,  without  shame.    He 
should pray to Bhagvãn, ‘O lord!  You are a friend of the humble!  You 
are an ocean of mercy!’  Also,  he  should  remember  a  great sãdhu of 
Bhagvãn, like Muktãnand Swãmi, and pray to him too.  As a result of 
this, all disturbing thoughts will be eradicated, and peace will prevail.  
Apart from this, there is no other method to eradicate such thoughts.” 
 
6.31
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  posed  another  question:    “Which  quality 
should be abandoned, even if it is believed to be a great quality in this 
satsang and  is  being  praised  by  all?    Which  fault,  even  though  it  is  a 
fault, is suitable to be absorbed?” 
 
6.32
 Once again, Shreeji Mahãrãj supplied the answer Himself:  “A person 
may  be  like  Muktãnand  Swãmi  and  may  be  following  the vartmãn 
strictly  than  all.    However,  as  a  result  of  this,  if  another sãdhu feels 
inferior  because  he  cannot  behave  on  the  same  level,  then  that 
quality, even  though it may  be  great, should  be  abandoned.   Instead, 
he  should  behave  on  the  same  level  as  all  the  other sãdhus.    Even 
though behaving on the same level as others is a drawback, it should 
be done.” 
 
6.33
 Again Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “In these sãdhus,  which  is  the  one  flaw 
which,  when  abandoned,  would  cause  all  flaws  to  be  abandoned?  
Which is the one quality which, if developed, would cause all qualities 
to be developed?” 
 
6.34
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “All flaws in a person reside in the flaw of 
perceiving  himself  with  the  body.    If  that  is  abandoned,  all  flaws  are 
abandoned.      Furthermore,   if   the   sole   quality   of ãtmã-nishthã 
(realising   himself   as   the ãtmã,   and   distinct   from   the   body)   is 
developed, then all qualities will develop.” 
 

LOYÃ 
- 330 - 
6.35
 Shreeji Mahãrãj again asked, “Which types of panch-vishays,  when 
indulged  in,  enlighten  the  mind,  and which  types  of vishays,  when 
indulged in, cause ignorance to prevail in the mind?” 
 
6.36
 Again, Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “By indulging in vishays related  to 
Bhagvãn,   the   mind   is   enlightened;   and   by   indulging   in   worldly 
vishays, ignorance prevails in the mind.” 
 
6.37
 Next, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Which desh, which kãl, which sang, and 
which kriyã should a person not associate with, even if it is Bhagvãn’s 
ãgnã?” 
 
6.38
 Shreeji Mahãrãj again supplied the answer Himself:  “Even if it is 
Bhagvãn’s ãgnã,  a sãdhu should  not  stay  in  a  place  where  he  has 
frequent  contact  with  his  bodily  relations.    Also,  if  I  seat  him  where 
women  can  also  be  seen  while  having darshan,  and  if  I  were  to  say, 
‘Do my darshan’,  then  he  should  not  sit  in  that  place.    Instead,  he 
should  make  an  excuse  and  leave.    In  addition,  if  unpleasant kãl is 
prevailing and riots are taking place, then even if it is Bhagvãn’s ãgnã 
to stay, a person should leave that place; but he should not stay there 
and suffer beatings.” 
 
6.39
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  another  question:    “Which shãstras 
should be heard and studied, and which shãstras should not be heard 
or studied?” 
 
6.40
 Once again, Shreeji Mahãrãj answered Himself, “Shãstras which  do 
not   promote Bhagvãn possessing   a svarup and   do   not   describe 
Bhagvãn’s avatãrs,  but  instead  discuss  pure  Vedãnt  and  propose  a 
single, formless entity, should never be studied or heard; even if they 
have  been  written  by  someone  very  intelligent.    On  the  other  hand, 
simple kirtans,  like  those  composed  by  Ranchhod  Bhakta,  should  be 
sung  and  heard  if  they  describe Bhagvãn’s murti.    Such shãstras 
should only be studied and heard.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Loyã || 6 || 114 || 

LOYÃ 
- 331 - 
Loyã – 7 
The Indriyas, The Antah-Karans, And Experience 
 
7.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Mãgshar  sud 3  [7
th
 December,  1820], 
Shreeji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated   bedstead   in   Surã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Loyã.    He  was  wearing  a  white pãgh,  with  the 
chhoglu hanging on one side.  He was wearing a white dagli made of 
chhint and  a  white,  cotton-padded survãl.    He  had  also  covered 
Himself   with   a   white pachhedi.      A sabhã of munis,   as   well   as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
7.2
 In the sabhã, Nityãnand Swãmi brought the Vachanãmrut manuscript 
and  presented  it  to  Shreeji  Mahãrãj.   Shreeji  Mahãrãj  examined  the 
manuscript  and  was  extremely  pleased  by  it.    He  then  said  to  the 
paramhans, “Today, please ask complex questions so that we may 
have a discussion.” 
 
7.3
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “The Shrutis state: 
 
rute gnãna-na muktihi 
There is no kalyãn without gnãn. 
 
tameva viditvãti-mrutyumeti nãnyaha panthã vidyate-yanãya 
Only by knowing Him does a person go beyond death; there is no other path 
for attaining kalyãn. 
 
 “These shloks state  that  the jeev attains kalyãn only  when  it  realises 
the  true gnãn of Bhagvãn.    If kalyãn can  only  be  attained  by gnãn, 
why   do   the shãstras also   prescribe   other  spiritual   activities   for 
attaining kalyãn?” 
 
7.4
 Hearing this question, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Gnãn means ‘to know’.” 
 
7.5
 At this point, Nityãnand Swãmi raised a doubt.  He said, “If gnãn 
means  merely  ‘to  know’,  then  the  whole  world  knows Bhagvãn 
through the shãstras.  However, not everyone attains kalyãn.” 

LOYÃ 
- 332 - 
7.6
 Hearing this, Shreeji Mahãrãj raised a question, “Just as a person does 
not   attain kalyãn by   knowing   the   previous avatãrs of Bhagvãn 
through  the shãstras,  do  you  think  all  those  who  actually  had  the 
darshan of Rãm, Krishna,  and  other avatãrs of Bhagvãn with  their 
own eyes attained kalyãn?” 
 
7.7
 Muktãnand  Swãmi  replied, “Those who merely see the pratyaksha 
svarup of Bhagvãn only attain kalyãn after several lives.” 
 
7.8
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  added,  “Those  who  know Bhagvãn through   the 
shãstras also  receive kalyãn after  several  lives.    This  is  because  the 
Bhagvãn that  these  people know  through  the shãstras is  the  same 
Bhagvãn other people see with their eyes; and the Bhagvãn that other 
people  see  with  their  eyes  is  the  same Bhagvãn that  people  know 
through  the shãstras.    Therefore,  the  resulting  rewards  of  both  are 
equal, and both attain kalyãn after several lives. 
 
7.9
 “After all, is not hearing Bhagvãn with  the  ears, gnãn?    It  is,  but  that 
can  be  said  to  be  merely  hearing Bhagvãn.    Is  not  touching Bhagvãn 
with  the  skin,  also gnãn?    It  is,  but  that  can  be  said  to  be  merely 
touching Bhagvãn.    Is  not  seeing Bhagvãn with  the  eyes, gnãn?   It  is, 
but  that  can  be  said  to  be  merely  seeing Bhagvãn.    Is  not  smelling 
Bhagvãn with  the  nose, gnãn?    It  is,  but  that  is  merely  smelling 
Bhagvãn.      Does   not   describing Bhagvãn with   the   tongue   also 
constitute gnãn?      It   does,   but   that   is   merely   having   described 
Bhagvãn.    In  this  way, gnãn can  be  attained  through  the  physical 
indriyas.  It can also be attained through the antah-karans, as well as 
directly from the experienced gnãn of the jeev, which is greater than 
both the indriyas and the antah-karans.  Of these, which gnãn are you 
speaking of? 
 
7.10
 “In order to create the universe, Bhagvãn assumed  the svarup of 
Aniruddha;  and  within Aniruddha dwells  the sthãvar and jangam 
world,  along  with ãkãsh.    In  the svarup of Sankarshan, Bhagvãn 

LOYÃ 
- 333 - 
destroys  the  universe.    In  the svarup of Pradyumna,  He  sustains  the 
universe.    He  also  assumes  various avatãrs,  such  as Matsya and 
Kurma.  He assumes these svarup according to whichever task needs 
to  be  accomplished  in  whichever  place.    Some  of  these  tasks  are 
invisible to the indriyas and antah-karans, and can only be known by 
experience.    For  the  successful  completion  of  these  tasks, Bhagvãn 
assumes  a  suitable svarup.    On  the  other  hand,  some  of  these  tasks 
are  visible  to  the indriyas and antah-karans.    For  the  successful 
completion  of  these  tasks,  again Bhagvãn assumes  an  appropriate 
svarup.      Therefore,   the gnãn of   which   of Bhagvãn’s svarup is 
instrumental in attaining kalyãn?  Is that your question?” 
 
7.11
 Nityãnand Swãmi confirmed, “We are saying that kalyãn is  attained 
by the gnãn of Bhagvãn whose svarup can be realised by the indriyas, 
the antah-karans, and experience.” 
 
7.12
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then explained, “That Bhagvãn is Shree  Krishna.    He 
has said of himself: 
 
yasmãt-ksharama-teetohama-kshãradapi chottamaha 
I am greater than all this is perishable, and I am greater than the 
imperishable.  
 
vishtabhyãham-idam krutsnam-ekãnshena sthito jagat 
I sustain the entire universe with a single fragment of myself. 
 
mattaha parataram nãnyat-kinchid-asti dhanamjaya 
mayi sarvam-idam protam sutre maniganã  iva 
O conqueror of wealth (Arjun).  There is nothing at all that is greater than me. 
All this creation is strung upon me – like a series of gems on a thread. 
 
pashya me pãrth rupãni shatasho-tha sahasra-shaha 
nãnã-vidhyãni divyãni nãnã-varna-kruteeni cha 
O Son of Prutha (Arjun)!  Behold my hundreds and thousands of divya svarups 
that are of various types and of assorted colours and shapes. 
 

LOYÃ 
- 334 - 
7.13
 “In these and many other shloks, He describes Himself as invisible to 
the indriyas and  the antah-karans.    Therefore,  knowing Bhagvãn 
perfectly  means  knowing pratyaksha  Bhagvãn through  the indriyas, 
the antah-karans, and experience.  Only then can a person be said to 
possess  perfect gnãn.    However,  if  any  one  of  these  three  types  of 
gnãn is  lacking,  a  person  cannot  be  said  to  have  realised ãtyantik 
gnãn,  nor  can  he  overcome  the  cycle  of  births  and  deaths.    In  fact, 
even  though  someone  may  have  attained  the brahm-svarup state 
through  his  personal  activities,  if  he  does  not  realise pratyaksha 
Bhagvãn in this way, he cannot be said to possess perfect gnãn.  That 
is why it is said in the Shreemad Bhãgvat:  
 
naishkarmyama-pyachuta-bhãva-varjitam na 
shobhate gnãn-malam niranjanam 
Even pure gnãn, in which all karmas have been rejected, is not elegant if it 
does not have bhakti towards Bhagvãn. 
 
7.14
 “The Geetã also states:  
 
karmano haypi boddhavyam boddhavyam cha vikarmanaha 
akarmanash-cha boddhavyam gahana karmano gatihi 
The nature of karma should be understood, the nature of prohibited karmas 
should be understood, and the nature of non-karma should also be understood.  
Indeed, the way of karma is very complex. 
 
 “Even in the state of non-karma (gnãn), there is still something left to 
be  realised.    That  is  to  say,  even  after  a  person  has  become brahm-
rup, he still has to realise Parbrahm Purushottam.  Only a person who 
is brahm-rup has the right to offer bhakti to Purushottam. 
 
7.15
 “Now, what constitutes bhakti?  It is when a person becomes brahm-
rup and performs the bhakti of pratyaksha Bhagvãn with sandalwood 
paste,  flowers, shravan,  and manan – just  as  the niranna-muktas of 
Shvet-Dvip,  having  become brahm-rup,  perform pujã of Parbrahm 
Nãrãyan by  offering  various  types  of  offerings,  such  as  sandalwood 
paste and flowers.  Therefore, Bhagvãn has mentioned in the Geetã: 

LOYÃ 
- 335 - 
brahma-bhootaha prasannãtmã na shochati na kankshati 
samaha sarveshu bhooteshu mad-bhaktim labhate param 
A person who has become brahm-rup remains joyful, grieves nothing, desires 
nothing, behaves equally with all beings, and attains my supreme bhakti. 
 
7.16
 “Therefore, a person who does not offer bhakti to Parbrahm after 
becoming brahm-rup, cannot be said to have attained ãtyantik kalyãn.  
 
bhoomir-aponalo vãyuhu kham mano buddhir-eva cha 
ahankãra iteeyam me bhinnã prakruti-rashtadhã 
These are my eight forms of prakruti – pruthvi, jal, tej, vãyu, ãkãsh, man, 
buddhi, and ahankãr. 
 
“This describes the all-pervaded jad prakruti. 
 
7.17
 “Furthermore, 
 
apareyam-itas-tvanyam prakrutim viddhi me parãm 
jeeva-bhootam mahãbaho yayedam dharyate jagat 
But O mighty-armed Arjun!  Also, know my other prakruti, the very element of 
life (chaitanya), by which this world is upheld.  Such is the all-pervasive 
chaitanya prakruti. 
 
 “This describes the all-pervasive chaitanya prakruti. 
 
7.18
 “That pratyaksha Bhagvãn is such that He is the supporter of both the 
eight  forms  of jad  prakruti and  also  of  the chaitanya prakruti that 
pervades  within.    For  example, ãkãsh is  the  supporter  of  the  other 
four   elements – pruthvi, jal, vãyu,   and tej.      Whenever pruthvi 
contracts, ãkãsh contracts  along  with  it.    When  the pruthvi expands, 
ãkãsh also expands along with it.  Similarly, ãkãsh also contracts and 
expands  along  with  the  contraction  and  expansion  of jal, tej,  and 
vãyu.  However, pruthvi and the other tattvas all contract and expand 
within ãkãsh.  In the same way, Bhagvãn expands and contracts along 
with  the  expansion  and  contraction  of  the  two prakrutis,  while  they 
themselves   contract   and   expand   within Bhagvãn Himself.      That 
Bhagvãn is the ãtmã of all.  This fact is stated in the Shrutis: 

LOYÃ 
- 336 - 
antah-pravishtaha shãstã janãnam sarvãtmã 
Bhagvãn, who enters within all, is the controller and ãtmã of all beings 
 
yasyãksharam shareeram... 
esha sarva-bhootãntarãtmã-pahata-pãpmã divyo, deva eko nãrãyanaha 
He, whose sharir is the imperishable, is the indwelling ãtmã of all beings, is 
without all evil, and is the one divya Bhagvãn Nãrãyan 
 
yasyãtmã shareeram ya ãtmãnam-antaro 
yamayati sa ta ãtmãntaryam-yamrutaha 
He, whose sharir is the ãtmãs, and who governs all ãtmãs from within, is your 
ãtmã, the antaryãmi, and immortal 
 
yasya pruthivi shareeram yaha 
pruthiveem-antaro yamayati sa ta ãtmãntaryãm-yamrutaha 
He, whose sharir is pruthvi and who governs it from within, is your ãtmã, the 
antaryãmi, and is immortal. 
 
7.19
 “Furthermore, even food, the mind, knowledge, and bliss have been 
described  as brahm;  various  such  types  of brahm-vidyã have  been 
mentioned.  What is the significance of this?  Well, those things have 
been  called brahm because Bhagvãn is  the  cause  of  all  and  the 
supporter of all.  However, they are all the sharir, and their shariri is 
pratyaksha Shree  Krishna Purushottam.    Both  the jad and chaitanya 
prakrutis,   along   with   their   entities   that   have   evolved   in   their 
expanded   and   contracted   states,   dwell   easily   within Bhagvãn.  
Moreover, Bhagvãn dwells within them all as their antaryãmi and as 
their cause.  It is that very Bhagvãn who is pratyaksha.  To know and 
see Bhagvãn with   such   an   understanding   of   greatness   is   called 
perfect gnãn.” 
 
7.20
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “If a person cannot experience the 
greatness  of Bhagvãn in  this  way,  but  does have  a firm  belief  of it  in 
his antah-karans, then can that be said to be perfect gnãn, or not?” 
 
7.21
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “In a dark house, a person can faintly see the 
grain-store  and  the  pillars;  but  due  to  the  darkness,  they  cannot  be 

LOYÃ 
- 337 - 
said  to  have  been  seen  totally.    In  the  same  way,  both  the jad and 
chaitanya prakrutis reside   within Purushottam Bhagvãn,   and   He 
dwells within them as well.  But, if a person experiences this only by 
assumption  and  does  not  actually  see  it,  then  he  cannot  be  said  to 
possess  perfect gnãn.    Nevertheless,  because  he  has  such  a  firm 
nishchay,   he   surely   must   have   experienced   some   sort   of alokik 
powers of Bhagvãn in the past; if not, he will experience them in the 
future. 
 
7.22
 “Despite having such a doubtless nishchay, if  he  does  not  experience 
the alokik powers,  he  should  think, ‘Bhagvãn  possesses  all  those 
powers, but He does not reveal them to me because that is His wish’.  If 
a  person  offers bhakti to Bhagvãn with  such  understanding  and 
remains fulfilled, then he can also be said to possess perfect gnãn. 
 
7.23
 “Therefore, a bhakta with gnãn is  a  person  who  thoroughly  knows 
Bhagvãn through  the indriyas,  the antah-karans,  and  experience.  
Such a bhakta has been praised in the Geetã as the best of all bhaktas: 
  
ãrto jignãsur-arthãrthee gnãnee cha bharatar-shabha 
teshãm gnãnee nitya-yukta eka-bhaktir-vishishyate 
O supreme among the descendants of Bharat (Arjun).  Four types of people 
worship me: a person who is distressed, a person who seeks knowledge of the 
ãtmã, a person who desires material objects, and a person who has gnãn.  Of 
these, the one with gnãn is the best because he is always engaged in me and is 
devoted to me alone. 
 
7.24
 “A bhakta with gnãn,  faithfully  serves pratyaksha  Bhagvãn – who 
eternally  has  a svarup – realising  Him  as  greater  than Prakruti, 
Purush and Akshar, and as being the cause and supporter of all.  This 
understanding  constitutes gnãn;  and  such gnãn leads  to ãtyantik 
moksh.    Those  who  do  not  understand  this,  merely  claim ‘aham-
brahmãsmi’ – I  am  brahm – from  the shãstras.    They  proclaim, ‘I am 
the   svarup   of   brahm,   and   Ram   and   Krishna   are   merely   avatãrs 
originating from me’.  Such blasphemous and unorthodox vedãntis of 

LOYÃ 
- 338 - 
today are extremely evil and great sinners.  At death, they are sent to 
Narak, and they will never be released from there.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Loyã || 7 || 115 || 
 
 
Loyã – 8 
Hyperactive Indriyas 
 
8.1
 In   the Samvat year   1877,   on   the   night  of Mãgshar   sud 5   [10
th
 
December,  1820],  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  in  Surã  Khãchar’s 
darbãr in  Loyã.    He  was  wearing  a  white khes and  had tied  a  white 
feto around  His  head.    He  was  also  wearing  a  white dagli made  of 
chhint.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various 
places, had gathered before Him. 
 
8.2
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked Shreeji Mahãrãj, “On seeing some 
inappropriate svabhãv of  a sãdhu,  a  person  who  is  thoughtless  may 
perceive avgun in  the sãdhu.    But,  why  does  a  person  who  is  wise 
perceive avgun in the sãdhu?” 
 
8.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If a person is wise and has noticed an 
inappropriate svabhãv within himself, has a hatred towards it, and is 
continually  acting  to overcome  that svabhãv,  then when  he  sees  that 
very  same svabhãv in  another sãdhu,  he  develops  a  dislike  towards 
that sãdhu.    On  the  other  hand,  a  fool  does  not  overcome  his  own 
svabhãvs,  and  when  he  sees  that  same svabhãv in  another sãdhu,  he 
perceives avgun in that sãdhu.  Such a person should be considered a 
fool.” 
 
8.4
 Then,   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   gathered   the   junior paramhans,   and   He 
Himself asked and answered questions. 
 
8.5
 First, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “The intensity and mildness of the force 
of kãm, krodh, lobh,  and  other  enemies is  due  to  the  phases  of 

LOYÃ 
- 339 - 
childhood,  youth,  and  old  age.    In  childhood  the  force  is  weak;  in 
youth,  the  force  in  intense;  then  in  old  age  the  force becomes  weak 
again.  Therefore, the intensity and mildness of the inner enemies can 
be noticed; but can they be weakened by any thought process?” 
 
8.6
 Shreeji Mahãrãj Himself replied, “The force of the enemies can be 
weakened by a thought process, which is as follows:  The mildness of 
those svabhãvs  in  childhood,  their  greater  intensity  in  youth,  the 
mildness  once  again  in  old  age,  is  due  to  food.    Specifically,  in 
childhood,  since  the  dietary  intake  is  small,  the  force  of kãm is mild.  
Similarly,  in  old  age,  a  person  dietary  intake  is  small,  so  again  the 
force  of kãm is  mild.    But  in  youth,  as  the  dietary  intake  increases, 
kãm also increases.  Therefore, in youth, if a person’s food intake is 
decreased,   and   if   he   deliberately   tolerates   cold,   heat,   rain,   and 
hunger,   then   by   maintaining   such   a   thought   process,   and   by 
maintaining profound association with a great sant, the force of kãm 
is weakened – even in the period of youth.” 
 
8.7
 Again,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked,  “People  become  addicted  to  many 
different   types of   substances,   like bhãng,   cannabis,   opium,   and 
alcohol.    Are  these  addictions  due  to  a  person’s kriyamãn or 
prãrabdha karmas?” 
 
8.8
 Replying, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “These addictions are developed not 
by prãrabdha, but by habit.  Therefore, if a person maintains courage, 
keeps shraddhã, and is determined to defeat the addiction, then it can 
be  overcome.    But,  if  he  has  no shraddhã and  is  cowardly,  then  that 
addiction cannot be overcome.” 
 
8.9
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Some children have a mature nature 
like elder people, whereas some have an extremely fidgety nature.  Is 
that nature due to company, or is it inherent within the jeev?” 
 
8.10
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “For the most part, a good or bad nature is 
due  to  the  company  kept by  a  person;  but in  some cases,  it  is  due  to 
past karmas.” 

LOYÃ 
- 340 - 
8.11
 Then, Kapileshvarãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, how can a person 
recognise  a svabhãv which  has  formed  in  a  past  life,  and  how  can  he 
recognise a svabhãv which has formed in this life?” 
 
8.12
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A recently formed svabhãv is  overcome  by 
staying in the company of a devout sãdhu and by making a little effort 
to eradicate it.  Just as grass growing on a wall dries up when there is 
no  rain  for  five  days,  similarly,  a  recently  formed svabhãv can  be 
overcome in a few days.  However, a svabhãv that has remained for a 
long  time  is  difficult  to  overcome,  even  after  great  effort  is  made  to 
eradicate it.  For example, if there are strong weeds or a bordi tree in 
the soil, then even if they are set on fire and burnt by a farmer, they 
will still grow.  However, if a person uses a hoe to uproot them from 
their roots, they can be removed.  Similarly, if a person remains in the 
company  of  a  devout sãdhu and  persists  with  great  effort,  even  an 
established svabhãv can be overcome; but only with great effort.” 
 
8.13
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked,  “For  a  person  whose indriyas are 
hyperactive,   what   are   the   individual   methods   by   which   that 
hyperactivity can be overcome?” 
 
8.14
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “To overcome the hyperactivity of the eyes, a 
person  should  fix  his  gaze  on  the  tip  of  his  and  nose  and  not  look 
elsewhere.    While  studying,  he  should  also  engage in bhajan and 
smaran.    While  doing  this,  if  he  continues  to  keep  his  eyes  open 
without blinking for half an hour or so – until his eyes begin to burn 
intensely  and  tears  flow – and  he  does  not  hold  a  improper  thought 
even  if  he  happens  to  notice  a  woman  or  other  objects,  then  even  if 
his eyes are hyperactive, they will become controlled. 
 
8.15
 “The nose does not like the odours coming from someone’s body, 
mouth, or clothes.  At that time, a person should think, ‘My own body 
appears  attractive  superficially,  but  it  is  filled  with  blood,  flesh,  and 
bones; and in the abdomen there are faeces, urine, and the intestines’.  
If he thinks in this way, the hyperactivity of the nose is eradicated. 

LOYÃ 
- 341 - 
8.16
 “The hyperactivity of the ears can be eradicated as follows:  When  a 
person  hears  some  humorous  talks  or  gossip,  he  develops  a  keen 
interest  to  listen  to  them;  whereas,  while  listening to  the kathãs and 
kirtans related to Bhagvãn, he falls asleep.  In that situation, a person 
should  rise  and  suppress  sleep  and  laziness.  He  should  also  keep 
faith  in  and  maintain  a  keen  interest  in  listening  to  the kathãs of 
Bhagvãn.  The ears can be controlled in this way. 
 
8.17
 “The sense of touch can be controlled by deliberately tolerating the 
cold, heat, and rain; by lying down anywhere; by keeping a blanket as 
a pillow and using it for covering the body only when it is very cold.  
Therefore, the skin becomes numb, and the hyperactivity of the sense 
of touch is eradicated. 
 
8.18
 “To overcome the hyperactivity of the hands, a person should keep a 
mãlã in  his  hand  whenever  the  hands  are  idle,  and  turn  it  while 
chanting  the  name  of Bhagvãn in  rhythm  with  the  inhaling  and 
exhaling   of   his   breath.     However,  he  should   not   turn   the mãlã 
hurriedly.    Some  say, ‘A person can chant the name of Bhagvãn  more 
quickly mentally’.  That principle is wrong, as the mind can only chant 
the  name  of Bhagvãn as  many  times  as  the  tongue  can  chant  the 
name  of Bhagvãn.    So,  by  applying  this  method,  the  hyperactivity  of 
the hands is eradicated. 
 
8.19
 “If the legs are hyperactive, they can be controlled by controlling the 
sitting posture. 
 
8.20
 “Hyperactive genitals can be controlled as follows:  When a person 
gets scabies or ringworm, and he scratches himself, the itching is not 
relieved  until  bleeding  occurs.    However,  if  he  does  not  scratch  the 
affected  area,  then  the  itching  decreases  by  itself.   Therefore,  even if 
an itching sensation arises on the genitals, it should not be scratched.  
Moreover,  in  the  case  of  it  becoming  frequently  excited,  if  a  person 
decreases his diet, does upvãs, and physically weakens the body, then 
the genitals can be controlled. 

LOYÃ 
- 342 - 
8.21
 “To conquer the tongue, it should not be given items that it likes, and 
the  diet  should  be  restricted.    In  this  way,  the  hyperactivity  of  the 
tongue is eradicated.   
 
8.22
 “Finally, the hyperactivity of a person’s speech can be eradicated by 
not  interrupting  with  wise  remarks  when  people  like  Muktãnand 
Swãmi  are  speaking  or  narrating  from  the shãstras.    Moreover,  if  a 
person  does  happen  to  interrupt,  he  should  turn  a mãlã twenty-five 
times.      By   this   method,   the   hyperactivity   of   speech   can   be 
eradicated.” 
 
8.23
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Of all these indriyas, which one, if fully 
controlled, leads to control over all the other indriyas?” 
 
8.24
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj answered His own question, “If the tongue is fully 
suppressed, then all the other indriyas can be suppressed.” 
 
8.25
 Again, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “If kãm pervades a person’s heart, and 
even though his genitals are covered by his clothes, how can a person 
realise that he has been pervaded by kãm?” 
 
8.26
 Shreeji Mahãrãj Himself replied, “When kãm pervades  a  person,  his 
eyes, and all of his other indriyas become hyperactive.  In this way, a 
person can realise that he has become overwhelmed by kãm.” 
 
8.27
 Once again, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “A person who has a hyperactive 
nature  should  become  calm,  and  a  person  who  has  a  calm  nature 
should   become   active.      By   which   thought   process   can   this   be 
achieved?” 
 
8.28
 Shreeji Mahãrãj Himself replied, “If a person who is  hyperactive 
thinks, ‘I am the ãtmã, brahm, genderless, and stable like ãkãsh’,  and 
he attains the upsham state through such thoughts, then he becomes 
calm.  If a person who is calm wishes to become more active, then he 
should  realise  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas.    When  he 
realises  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn,  he  engages  in  the  nine  forms  of 

LOYÃ 
- 343 - 
bhakti,  and  performs  basic  service  of  the bhaktas of Bhagvãn.    As  a 
result of this, his nature becomes more active.” 
 
8.29
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Is there anything in the eight shãstras, 
such  as  the  Shreemad  Bhãgvat,  which  should  be  ignored,  or  should 
everything be remembered?” 
 
8.30
 Replying to His own question, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “In all of those 
shãstras there   are countless charitras,   and   through   all   of   those 
charitras,  the  strengths  of  the bhaktas who  have  attained Bhagvãn 
are  described.    Therefore,  they  are  all  suitable  to  be  remembered.  
However, among all these charitras, only those charitras that match a 
person’s own strengths should be remembered.  The others may be 
ignored  with  the  following  understanding: ‘These talks are true, but 
they are for the benefit of other bhaktas; they are not for me’.’’ 
 
8.31
 Once more, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “All of you youngsters  are  seated 
here;  and  from  amongst  you,  all  the sãdhus  praise  some  and  do  not 
praise  others.    Now,  all  of  you  are  of  a  similar  age  and  all  have  the 
same company.  In fact, you all have the same food, clothing, upãsanã, 
shãstras, and mantra, and all listen to the same talks.  So, what is the 
reason for the difference in levels amongst you?  Moreover, he who is 
a sãdhu,   follows dharma completely,   is   unbiased,   and   views   all 
equally; therefore, he would describe everyone as they truly are.  So, 
please answer the question.” 
 
8.32
 Again,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  provided  the  answer,  “Only  he  who  has 
shraddhã is  praised  by  a sãdhu;  and  that  is  also  why  he  follows 
dharma more strictly.  Also, he has shraddhã in serving a sant, and in 
listening  to  the  talks  of Bhagvãn.    He  also  has  faith  in  the sant.  
Therefore,  he  has  progressed.    On  the  other  hand,  he  who  has  not 
progressed,  despite  staying  in  such  company,  should  be  known  to 
lack shraddhã.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Loyã || 8 || 116 || 
 

LOYÃ 
- 344 - 
Loyã – 9 
Development Of Dharma, Gnãn, Vairãgya, And Bhakti 
 
9.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Mãgshar  sud 6  [11
th
 December,  1820], 
Shreeji Mahãrãj was sitting in Surã Khãchar’s darbãr in Loyã.  He was 
wearing a white dagli made of chhint, and a white survãl.  He had also 
tied  a  white feto around His head.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
9.2
 Then,  Shreeji Mahãrãj  requested, “May all  the paramhans please 
engage in a question-answer discussion amongst themselves.” 
 
9.3
 Ãtmãnand Swãmi then asked Akhandãnand Swãmi, “What are the 
factors  that  lead  to  the  development  of vairãgya, gnãn, bhakti,  and 
dharma?” 
 
9.4
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “Vairãgya is  developed  when  a  person 
comes  to  understand  the  nature  of Kãl.    What  is  this nature  of Kãl?  
Well, it  is  to  know  the  process of nitya-pralay, nimit-pralay, prãkrut-
pralay,  and ãtyantik-pralay,  as  well as  the  lifespan  of  all  beings  from 
Brahmã to the smallest blade of grass.  After knowing this, if a person 
understands  the  body,  the brahmãnd,  and  all  other  objects  to  be 
subject to the force of Kãl, then vairãgya would arise. 
 
9.5
 “Gnãn arises  if  a  person  listens  to  the  Upanishads,  such  as  the 
Bruhadãranya   Upanishad,   Chhãndogya   Upanishad,   and   Kathvalli 
Upanishad,  the  Bhagvad  Geetã,  the  Vãsudev  Mahãtmya,  the  Vyãs 
Sutras, and other shãstras from a sat-purush. 
 
9.6
 “Dharma arises  if  a  person  listens  to  the  Yãgnavalkya  Smruti,  Manu 
Smruti,  Parãshar  Smruti,  Shankh-Likhit Smruti,  and  other  Smrutis.  
By  doing  so, dharma will  arise,  and  a  person  will  develop  belief  in 
those shãstras. 
 

LOYÃ 
- 345 - 
9.7
 “Bhakti arises  if  a  person  understands  the avatãrs of Bhagvãn.    How 
should he understand them?  Well, when he hears about the murti of 
Bhagvãn that are in each khand; and when he hears about the dhãms 
of Bhagvãn – Golok, Vaikunth, Brahmpur, Shvet-Dvip;  and  when  he 
listens with a sense of admiration to the talks of the leelãs of Bhagvãn 
describing  the creation, sustenance, and  destruction  of  the universe; 
and  when  he  listens  with  keen  interest  to  the  narration  of  the leelãs 
of Rãm, Krishna,  and  the  other avatãrs of Bhagvãn,  then bhakti 
towards Bhagvãn would develop. 
 
9.8
 “Now, even though a person in his initial stages has an immature 
mind, if he listens to the ceremonial Smrutis, dharma would develop.  
Later,  after  becoming  firm  in  his  observance  of dharma,  if  he  listens 
to shãstras that  explain upãsanã,  then  all  three  (gnãn, bhakti,  and 
vairãgya)  would  develop.    These  are  the  factors  which  lead  to  the 
development of the four qualities.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Loyã || 9 || 117 || 
 
 
Loyã – 10 
Remaining Without Moh 
 
10.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on  the  morning  of Mãgshar  sud 8  [13
th
 
December,   1820],   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated 
bedstead in Surã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Loyã.  He was wearing a white 
dagli made  of chhint and  white survãl.    He  had  also  tied  a  white feto 
around  His  head.    A sabhã of munis,  as well  as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
10.2
 Then, Nityãnand Swãmi said, “In this world, there are some men who 
have  such  love  for  women  and  other  objects,  that  if  they  were  to  be 
separated, they would not be able to live.  There are others who have 
love for women and other objects, but it is not as intense.  So, if they 

LOYÃ 
- 346 - 
were to be separated, they would survive.  In this way, there are two 
types of people.  Now, if the first type of person, who involves himself 
in  worldly  life  with  love,  were  to  meet Bhagvãn,  he  would  become 
attached to Bhagvãn in the same way; if he were to be separated from 
Bhagvãn,  he  would  not  be  able  to  survive.    Moreover,  if  the  second 
person,  with  less  love  for  worldly  life,  were  to  meet Bhagvãn,  he 
would have  less  love  for Bhagvãn as  well.   Is  the difference  between 
these two types of people due to karmas, or is it eternal?” 
 
10.3
 Hearing  this, Shreeji Mahãrãj  replied, “Those differences  are  not 
inherently  present  in  the jeev;  instead,  they  arise  as  a  result of 
karmas.  How does this happen?  Well, when a jeev performs a karma, 
the  force  of  its vruttis can  be  of  three  levels:    mild,  medium,  and 
intense.    The  force  with  which  the vruttis attach  themselves  to  the 
object, determines the effect of the karma upon the jeev.  As a result, 
three levels of love arise due to these karmas.” 
 
10.4
 Again, Nityãnand Swãmi asked, “Do the three levels in the force of the 
vruttis occur as a result of the gun, or is there some other reason?” 
 
10.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The three types of differences are not due to 
the gun;  to  be  more  precise,  when  only  the indriyas indulge  in  an 
object,  then  a  mild  force  results.    When  the indriyas indulge  in  an 
object along with the mind, a medium force develops.  When all three 
– the indriyas,  the  mind,  and  the jeev – combine  and  indulge  in  an 
object, the vruttis develop an intense force.  Even if that intense force 
affects  only  the  eyes,  the  other indriyas would  follow,  and  the  force 
would affect them as well.  In this way, whichever indriya is primarily 
affected  by  the  intense  force,  the  other indriyas follow.    Moreover, 
that intense force affects all three types of people – rãjasi, sãttvik, and 
tãmasi.    In  fact,  such  intense  force  is  present  in  each  of  the indriyas; 
therefore, love for objects arises.” 
 
10.6
 Then, Nityãnand Swãmi asked, “Why does he not develop love for 
Bhagvãn with such an intense force?” 

LOYÃ 
- 347 - 
10.7
 Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Good and bad behaviour is determined by the 
factors  of desh, kãl, kriyã, dhyãn, shãstras, dikshã, mantra,  and sang.  
So,  if  a  person  attains  pleasant  factors,  then  he  develops  love  for 
Bhagvãn quickly.    But,  if  he  encounters  unpleasant  factors,  then  he 
would develop love for objects other than Bhagvãn.” 
 
10.8
 Then,  Chaitanyãnand  Swãmi asked, “What should a person do in 
difficult times?” 
 
10.9
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Whenever and wherever times are difficult, 
a  person  should  abandon  that  place  for  another  location;  he  should 
not  stay  where  the  factor  of kãl is  unpleasant.    In  actual  fact, kãl,  in 
the  form  of Satya-Yug, Tretã-Yug, Dvãpar-Yug,  and Kali-Yug,  exists 
both externally and internally.  So, when Kali-Yug is prevalent within 
a person’s heart, he should not visualise the murti of Bhagvãn within 
his heart; instead, it should be seen externally, before his eyes.” 
 
10.10
 Then,  Muktãnand  Swãmi  asked,  “How  can  a  person  distinguish 
whether   a   mild,   a   medium,   or   an   intense   force   prevails   within 
someone’s heart?” 
   
10.11
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied, “When the force is mild, a person would 
have the same feelings on seeing a young girl, a young woman, or an 
old  woman.    This  is  because  only  the vruttis of  the indriyas have 
become involved.  As a result, a mild force has developed.  When the 
mind unites with the indriyas and they see the three types of women, 
then  no  improper  thoughts  arise  towards  the  young  girl  or  the  old 
woman;  but  indecent  thoughts  certainly  do  arise  towards  the  young 
woman, and a disturbance is experienced.  This should be known as a 
medium level force.  When both the mind and the jeev combine with 
the indriyas and  look  at  the  three  types  of  women,  then  improper 
thoughts arise towards all three types of women, and a disturbance is 
experienced.    In  fact,  a  person  would  experience  such  improper 

LOYÃ 
- 348 - 
thoughts  even  on  seeing  his  own  mother  or  sister.    This  should  be 
known as an intense force.” 
 
10.12
 Then, Brahmãnand  Swãmi  asked,  “Suppose  a  person  notices  the 
distinction  between  the  three  types  of  women,  and  notices  their 
beauty   and   ugliness,   yet   he   does   not   experience   any   improper 
thoughts.  Which type of force is that?” 
 
10.13
 Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Having realised an object to be the cause of 
intense  misery  and  having  reflected  upon  that  fact,  a  person  assigns 
serious flaws to that object.  The reflection of those disadvantages in 
the  mind  then  leads  to  those  flaws  being  acknowledged  by  the jeev.  
The  witness  (Bhagvãn),  who  is  greater  than  the jeev,  also  confirms 
those   flaws,   and   so   an   extremely   firm   belief   in   those   flaws   is 
developed.    Therefore,  when  the vruttis of  the indriyas enter  the 
object, the mind and jeev also go along with the vruttis; but since the 
jeev’s deep  belief  of  the  flaw  in  the  object  pierces  the  mind  and 
indriyas,  even  though  the  object  is  seen  and  fully  recognised,  an 
intense hatred still arises for it.  For example, if a snake’s venom is 
dropped  into  a  bowl  of  sweet  milk,  and  a  person  sees  the  venom 
being added, then even though the milk appears exactly as before, an 
intense  hatred  for  it  prevails  in  his  heart.    This  is  because  he  has 
realised, ‘If I drink the milk, I will die’.    Similarly,  such  a  person  has 
realised, ‘This beautiful woman is an obstacle on the path of kalyãn; 
and she is the cause of extreme misery in this lok and in the higher loks.  
In  fact,  I  have  attained  the  company  of  women countless  times  in  past 
lives  in  various  life-forms,  and  if  I  still  do  not  worship  Bhagvãn,  I  will 
attain   the   company   of   countless   more   females.      Therefore,   this 
attainment is not rare.  However, the company of Bhagvãn and His sant 
is extremely rare, and this woman is a major obstacle in the attainment 
of that’.  A person who has realised this and has intensely realised the 
flaws  in  the  object,  will  never  be  infatuated  on  seeing  a  woman, 
regardless of how beautiful she may be. 
 

LOYÃ 
- 349 - 
10.14
 “Furthermore, there is another way to remain free of infatuation:  
Janak  the  Videhi,  who  was  a  great  king  and  a bhakta of Bhagvãn, 
stayed in his kingdom and, due to his firmness in gnãn, remained free 
of  infatuation  even  while indulging  in  attractive vishays.    Similarly,  a 
bhakta with gnãn like  Janak,  has  the  thought, ‘I am the ãtmã – pure, 
chaitanya,  unchanging,  blissful,  and  imperishable.    However,  vishays 
like  women  and  other  objects,  are  full  of  misery;  they  are  worthless, 
perishable, and jad’.  With this thought, he believes only his own self, 
the ãtmã, as being blissful.  Also, he believes, ‘The pleasure and charm 
which  are  apparent  in  the  vishays  are  only  experienced  due  to  the 
ãtmã.    But,  when  the  ãtmã  leaves  the  body,  that  which  was  once 
pleasurable becomes miserable’.  He  reflects  upon  his ãtmã in  this 
way. 
 
10.15
 “He also reflects upon Paramãtmã,  who  is  greater  than  the ãtmã,  as 
follows:   ‘I have attained this gnãn of the pure ãtmã, which is greater 
than mãyã, by the grace of the sant.  That sant is a bhakta of Bhagvãn.  
Moreover, that Bhagvãn is the ãtmã of even brahm, who is ãtmã of all.  
He is the ãtmã of Akshar, and is also the ãtmã of the countless millions 
of  muktas.    I  am  the  brahm-rup  dãs  of  that  Parbrahm  Purushottam 
Nãrãyan’. 
 
10.16
 “Also, he understands the greatness of Bhagvãn by realising: 
 
dyupataya eva ten a yayur-antam anantatayã 
tvamapi yad-antarãnda-nichayã nanu sãvaranãhã 
Even the masters of the higher loks cannot understand your greatness, 
because it is endless.  Neither can you yourself understand your own greatness.  
In your each and every hair, countless brahmãnds and their barriers (jad 
prakruti) fly simultaneously at immense speed – like specks of dust flying in 
the air.  Even the Shrutis, ultimately perish in you, and fail to praise your glory. 
 
“Such shloks have greatly explained the greatness of Bhagvãn.   
 
10.17
 “When a person, who has gnãn of his own self and of Bhagvãn, attains 
a vishay, his mind would not even be slightly affected by it, regardless 

LOYÃ 
- 350 - 
of  how  appealing  it  may  be.    He  indulges  in  the  essential vishays 
without  becoming  dependent  upon  them.    Instead,  he  indulges  in 
them  independently  of  his  own  accord.    Just  as  a  spider  spreads  its 
own web and then it independently retracts it when necessary, in the 
same   way,   a bhakta possessing gnãn engages   the vruttis of   his 
indriyas in  the vishays and  retracts  them  on  his  own  accord.    Such  a 
person feels as if he is in the forest, even if he is amongst people; and 
though he may be in the forest, he experiences more happiness there 
than a person does from ruling a kingdom. 
 
10.18
 “The bhakta may  reside  in  a  kingdom,  thousands  of  people  may  be 
under his command, and he may be wealthy; but he himself does not 
feel, ‘I have become very great’.    Furthermore,  if  the  kingdom  is 
destroyed and he begs for food from house to house with a clay bowl, 
he  does  not  feel, ‘Now I have become poor’.    This  is  because  he 
remains  absolutely  carefree  in  his  own  bliss,  and  he  knows  the 
greatness  of  his  own  self  and  that  of Bhagvãn.    Therefore,  he  views 
gold,  dirt,  iron,  and  stones  as  equal;  he  also  feels  calmness  in  praise 
and  insult.    Since  his  vision  has  become  broad,  and  he  knows  all 
worldly  objects  to  be  worthless,  no  objects  are  capable  of  binding  a 
person  with gnãn.   For  example,  when a  man  who was initially  poor 
receives  a  kingdom, his  vision  becomes  broad.   At first,  he may have 
been  selling  bundles  of  wood  or  doing  various  other  insignificant 
jobs,  but  he  forgets  them  all  and  he  begins  to  do  important  tasks 
related  to  his  kingdom.    Similarly, to  a  person  with gnãn,  all  objects 
become worthless; and due to that gnãn, his vision becomes broad.  A 
person with such an understanding becomes happy. 
 
10.19
 “Also, if a person has faith, and he believes, ‘Whatever such a great 
sant and Bhagvãn say is the truth; there is no doubt in it’, and with this 
belief he  does  as Bhagvãn and  His sant instruct  him  to  do,  then  that 
person  remains  happy.    These  are  the  two  types  of  people  who  are 
happy; apart from them, everyone is unhappy.  This is also described 
in the following shlok:  

LOYÃ 
- 351 - 
yash-cha mudhatamo loke yash-cha buddheha param gataha 
tãvubho sukham-edhete klishya-tyantarito janaha 
In this world, there are two types of people who experience the bliss of 
Bhagvãn:  those who are utterly ignorant and have blind faith in Bhagvãn, and 
those who are perfectly enlightened and have realised Bhagvãn.  Those who 
are in between, are troubled. 
 
10.20
 “Also, in the Bhagvad Geetã, it is said: 
 
vishayã vinivar-tante nirãhãrasya dehinaha 
rasa-varjam rasopyasya param drushtva nivartate 
The sense objects recede for a person who refrains from indulging in them.  
However, the longing for them does not subside.  The longing subsides only 
when his vision reaches Bhagvãn. 
 
“This means that all  objects,  except Bhagvãn,  become  worthless  to  a 
person  whose  vision  becomes alokik in  this  way.    Moreover,  the 
meaning of these two shloks is the same.” 
 
10.21
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi said, “Mahãrãj, now please ask the question 
you were going to ask.” 
 
10.22
 So, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Is there only  misery  in mãyã,  or  is  there 
also some happiness in it?  That is the question.” 
 
10.23
 Muktãnand Swãmi replied, “Mãyã causes only misery.” 
 
10.24
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Of the three gun – sattva-gun, rajo-gun, 
and tamo-gun – which  arise  from Mãyã, sattva-gun is  said  to  give 
happiness.  Furthermore, in the Shreemad Bhãgvat it is said: 
 
sattvam yad-brahma-darshanam 
Sattva-gun leads to the vision of Bhagvãn. 
 
“It is also said that the products of sattva-gun are gnãn, vairãgya, 
wisdom,  tranquillity,  and  discipline.    How  is mãyã in  this  form  a 
cause of misery?  Furthermore, it is stated in the eleventh skandh: 

LOYÃ 
- 352 - 
vidyavidye mama tanu viddhyud-dhava shareerinam; 
bandha-mokshakari ãdye mãyayã me vinir-mite 
O Uddhav!  Realise my two forms – both of which have been created from my 
mãyã:  the ancient vidya and avidya, which free and bind people respectively. 
 
“So, how is mãyã in  the  form  of  knowledge,  which  leads  to moksh,  a 
cause of misery?” 
 
10.25
 Hearing the question, Muktãnand Swãmi and all the other paramhans 
said, “Mahãrãj, we are unable to answer, so please have mercy, and 
give the answer yourself.” 
 
10.26
 Hearing this, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “To a sinful person, the svarup of 
Yam-Rãj appears  frightful  and  terrible,  with  large  teeth and  a  large, 
frightening  mouth;  he  appears  black  like  soot,  huge  like  a  mountain, 
and  horrific  like  death.    In  this  way,  his svarup appears  dreadful.  
However,  to  a  good  person,  the svarup of Yam-Rãj appears  very 
pleasant,  like Vishnu.    Similarly,  to  those  who  are vimukhs, mãyã 
causes attachment and intense misery, while to a bhakta of Bhagvãn 
that  same mãyã is  the  cause  of  intense  happiness.    Also,  the  entities 
that  have  evolved  out  of Mãyã – the antah-karans,  the indriyas,  and 
their  presiding devs – all support  the bhakti of Bhagvãn.    Therefore, 
for a bhakta of Bhagvãn, mãyã is not a cause of misery; it is a source 
of great happiness.” 
 
10.27
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “If mãyã is a cause of happiness, why 
is  it  that  when  a bhakta of Bhagvãn visualises the murti of Bhagvãn 
and  engages  in  worship, mãyã,  in  the  form  of  the antah-karans, 
causes misery by generating many disturbing thoughts?” 
 
10.28
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Mãyã, in the form of the antah-karans, does 
not   cause   misery   to   a   person   who   thoroughly   understands   the 
greatness  of Bhagvãn and  has  an  absolutely  firm  refuge  of Bhagvãn; 
but  it  does  cause  misery  to  a  person  who  does  not  have  this  refuge.  
For  example,  a kusangi would  attempt  to  dislodge  only a  weak 

LOYÃ 
- 353 - 
satsangi;  but  no  one  would  dare  to  dislodge  a  firm satsangi.    In  fact, 
no  one  would  be  able  to  speak  unkindly  of satsang in  his  presence.  
Similarly, mãyã,   in   the   form   of   the antah-karans,   would   never 
entertain  a  desire  to  intimidate  a  person  who  has  a  firm  refuge  in 
Bhagvãn.    Instead,  it  would  help  his bhakti to  flourish.    However, 
mãyã does  deflect  a  person  who  has  a  slight  deficiency  in  his  refuge 
in Bhagvãn, and does cause him misery.  However, when that person 
develops  a  complete  refuge  in Bhagvãn, mãyã is  not  able  to  disturb 
him or cause him pain.  Therefore, the answer is that if a person has 
complete nishchay in Bhagvãn, mãyã is  not  capable  of  causing  him 
misery.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Loyã || 10 || 118 || 
 
 
Loyã – 11 
 Beliefs Of A Sat And An Asat Person 
 
11.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on  the  morning  of Mãgshar  vad 8  [27
th
 
December,  1820],  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  in 
Surã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Loyã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.    A sabhã of sãdhus,  as  well as haribhaktas from  various 
places, had gathered before Him. 
 
11.2
 Then, Shuk Muni asked Shreeji Mahãrãj, “What understanding does 
an asat-purush adopt   from   the   Shreemad   Bhãgvat,   the   Bhagvad 
Geetã, and other sacred shãstras?” 
   
11.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The answer is as follows:  An asat-purush 
person  believes  that  all  the sthãvar and jangam male  and  female 
svarups in  this  world  have  been  created  through Mãyã and  the 
Purush, Virãt,  and svarup of Bhagvãn.    This  implies  that  all  these 
svarups are  manifestations  of Bhagvãn Himself.    For  this  reason,  a 
person  aspiring  for kalyãn should  initially  conquer  his  mind;  and 

LOYÃ 
- 354 - 
then,  if  his  mind  is  attracted  towards  a  higher  or  lower svarup of 
either  a  male  or  female,  he  should  perform dhyãn upon  that  very 
svarup in   order   to   attain   instantaneous samãdhi.      If   the   mind 
perceives any flaws in that svarup, then he should believe that svarup 
to be brahm by thinking, ‘The whole world is brahm’.  Thinking in this 
way, he should disprove the perception of those flaws.  In this way, to 
accept only the words regarding experiences from the shãstras is the 
understanding  of  an asat-purush.    Such  a  misunderstanding  reflects 
the wicked nature of his mind, and at the end of his life, he is sent to 
the deep regions of Narak and the cycle of births and deaths.” 
 
11.4
 Then,  Shuk  Muni  requested,  “Now,  please  explain  what 
understanding a sat-purush person adopts from the sacred shãstras.” 
 
11.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “The answer to this question is given in 
the  sacred shãstras themselves.    Specifically,  those  desiring kalyãn 
should not perform dhyãn upon – with the exception of Purushottam 
Nãrãyan – any devs,  such  as Shiv and Brahmã.    Instead,  among  all 
humans and devs, they should perform dhyãn only upon murtis, such 
as Rãm and Krishna,  which  are avatãrs of Purushottam Nãrãyan.  
Furthermore,   the   wise bhaktas consider   all   the   places   where 
Bhagvãn’s murti of Rãm and Krishna reside  to  be Vaikunth, Golok, 
Shvet-Dvip, and Brahmpur.  They consider the pãrshads that dwell in 
those loks to  be  the pãrshads of Rãm and Krishna,  such  as Hanumãn 
and Uddhav. 
 
11.6
 “They also regard the divya murtis  of Bhagvãn in  those loks,  which 
are  radiant  with  the  light  of  countless  millions  of  suns,  moons,  and 
flames of fire, to be murtis of avatars such as Rãm and Krishna in their 
dhãms.  Therefore, a person who adopts such an understanding from 
the  sacred shãstras,  and  performs dhyãn on  the  human svarup of 
Bhagvãn with   a  sense  of   divinity,   never   equates   the svarups of 
Bhagvãn’s avatãrs and   other svarups.      In   reality,   all murtis   of 
Bhagvãn’s avatãrs have only two arms.  However, for the sole reason 

LOYÃ 
- 355 - 
of   dismissing   any   similarity   that   a   person   lacking   wisdom   may 
perceive between Bhagvãn’s svarup and other svarups, they are often 
described as having four arms or eight arms. 
 
11.7
 “Moreover, a person should only perform dhyãn on  the murti of 
Bhagvãn that  he  has  attained,  not  on  the murtis  of  the  previous 
avatãrs.    Therefore,  like  a  woman  who  keeps  the  vow  of  fidelity,  a 
person should remain totally faithful to the murti of Bhagvãn that he 
has attained.  Pãrvati has also said,  
 
koti janma-laga ragad hamãri; varu Shambhu, ke rahu kumãri 
For a million lives I have done so; I’ll marry Shambhu, or remain unwed.  
 
“Such a vow of fidelity has  also  been  mentioned  in  order  to  dismiss 
the  similarity  that  a  person  lacking  wisdom  perceives  between  the 
svarup of Bhagvãn and  other  beings.    This  is  because  if  someone 
strays from the murti of Bhagvãn which he has attained, and instead 
performs dhyãn on  the  previous avatãrs of  that  very Bhagvãn,  then 
he  may  later  even  abandon Bhagvãn and  perform dhyãn upon  other 
devs of other human svarups.  That is why the vow of fidelity has been 
mentioned, not because there is any difference between the murtis of 
Bhagvãn themselves.    This  is  the  understanding  of  a sat-purush.  
Therefore, a person should only hear the sacred shãstras from a sat-
purush person, but never from an asat-purush.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Loyã || 11 || 119 || 
 
 
Loyã – 12 
Savikalp And Nirvikalp Nishchay 
 
12.1
 In   the Samvat year   1877,   on   the   night   of Mãgshar   vad 9   [28
th
 
December,  1820],  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  in 
Surã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Loyã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes,  and  was  also  wearing  a  red,  woollen dagli.    A sabhã of 
paramhans, as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered 
before Him. 

LOYÃ 
- 356 - 
12.2
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj raised a question:  “Nishchay in Bhagvãn is  of 
two  types: savikalp nishchay and nirvikalp nishchay.    In  each  type  of 
nishchay there   are   three   sub-categories:    uttam, madhyam,   and 
kanishth.  Please describe the distinguishing characteristics of each of 
these six sub-categories.” 
 
12.3
 The paramhans were unable to answer, so Shreeji  Mahãrãj said, “The 
characteristics of a person with the kanishth savikalp nishchay are as 
follows:  As long as Bhagvãn exhibits kãm, krodh, lobh, mãn, and svãd, 
to  the  same  extent  as  other  humans,  the  person’s nishchay in 
Bhagvãn remains.      However,   if Bhagvãn were   to   display   these 
svabhãvs more so than others, his nishchay would be shattered. 
 
12.4
 “The nishchay of   someone   with   the madhyam savikalp nishchay 
remains  firm  even  if Bhagvãn exhibits kãm and krodh to  a  double 
degree than that of humans. 
 
12.5
 “Finally, a person with the uttam savikalp nishchay would  never 
doubt any action of Bhagvãn, even if Bhagvãn were to behave crudely 
like a person of a low varna and ãshram; or exhibit anger or violence; 
or  indulge  in  drinking  alcohol,  meat-eating,  or  adultery.    This  is 
because  he  understands Bhagvãn to  be  the  all-doer,  the  supreme 
lord,  and  the  experience  of  everything.    Such  a  person  realises  that 
whatever  actions  take  place  in  the  world  are  the  result  of Bhagvãn, 
who  is anvay within  all  beings  as  their  controller.    If  He  were  to 
indulge in some shameful deed, it would not affect Him at all since He 
Himself  is  the  all-doer.    In  this  way,  a  person  who  has  realised 
Bhagvãn as the lord of all, is known as a bhakta of Bhagvãn with the 
uttam savikalp nishchay. 
 
12.6
 “As for a bhakta with the kanishth nirvikalp nishchay, no matter what 
good  or  bad  deeds  he  witnesses  being  performed  by Bhagvãn,  he 
understands  that  in  all  actions Bhagvãn performs,  He  is  still  a  non-
doer, since He is brahm.  That brahm is like ãkãsh; everything resides 
in ãkãsh and all actions take place within it.  The bhakta realises such 
qualities  of brahm of Bhagvãn.    For example,  during  the  narration  of 

LOYÃ 
- 357 - 
the rãs-leelã, Parikshit Rãjã asked Shukji, ‘Bhagvãn assumes an avatãr 
to uphold dharma.  Then, why did He associate with the gopis?’  Shukji 
replied, ‘Shree  Krishna  is  radiant  like  fire;  whatever  actions  He 
performs, good or bad, are burnt to ashes’.  In this way, a person who 
understands Bhagvãn as brahm,  and  unaffected  by  the  actions  He 
performs, is said to have the kanishth nirvikalp nishchay. 
 
12.7
 “A person who becomes like the niranna-muktas of Shvet-Dvip – who 
are  free  from  the shad-urmi (six  physical  and  emotional  feelings) – 
and   worships Vãsudev,   is   said   to   possess   a madhyam nirvikalp 
nishchay. 
 
12.8
 “Finally, a person  possessing  the uttam nirvikalp nishchay realises 
that  countless  millions  of brahmãnds,  each  encircled  by  the  eight 
barriers  (jad  prakruti),  appear  like  mere  atoms  before Akshar.    Such 
is  the  greatness  of Akshar,  the dhãm of Purushottam Nãrãyan.    A 
person  who  worships Purushottam realising  himself  to  be akshar-
rup, can be said to possess the uttam nirvikalp nishchay.”   
 
12.9
 Then, Chaitanyãnand Swãmi  asked,  “Mahãrãj,  how  have  these 
distinctions in nishchay arisen?” 
 
12.10
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “When a mumukshu initiall