ndamental 
principle  is  explained  to  even  the  most  learned  scholars,  scriptural 
readers, or highly intelligent people, they would have to agree with it.  
In  no  way  could  they  doubt, ‘This might not be so’.  That  is  what  can 
be called a fundamental principle. 
 
39.14 
“Now, the fundamental principle of the tenth skandh is as follows: He 
whom the Upanishads (Vedãnt) and the Shrutis and Smrutis describe 
as  being brahm,  luminous,  the  embodiment  of gnãn,  the  essence, 
subtle; and who is described as niranjan, kshetragna, the cause of all, 
Parbrahm, Purushottam, Vãsudev, Vishnu, Nãrãyan,  and nirgun – is 
this pratyaksha  svarup of Shree  Krishna Vãsudev,  the  son  of Vasudev.  
Therefore, wherever there are passages containing shloks in the tenth 
skandh,  the  words  of  those shloks refer  to  this pratyaksha  svarup of 
Shree Krishna Bhagvãn; there is no mention of anyone more superior 

GADHADÃ II 
- 535 - 
to Shree Krishna Bhagvãn.  The tenth skandh also mentions that only 
Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn is  the  cause  of  the  creation,  sustenance  and 
destruction of the whole universe. 
 
39.15 
“The greatness of Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn is  narrated  in  the  fifth 
skandh.    Also  mentioned  are  the  many  different svarups assumed  by 
Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn in  various khands for  the  sustenance  of  the 
world  and  for  the  sake  of  bestowing  bliss  upon  his bhaktas.    In 
addition,  all  those  who  abide  by  the niyams prescribed  by Shree 
Krishna  Bhagvãn attain  a  great  status,  whereas  those  who  do  not 
abide by those niyams fall from their status, even if they are great.  It 
is  also  said  that  if  a  common  person  disobeys  those niyams,  he  will 
certainly fall back. 
 
39.16 
“That  same Shree   Krishna   Vãsudev,   who   as   a   child   gave   the 
spectacular darshan of the pratyaksha four-armed svarup to Vasudev 
and Devki, is in fact the svarup of the eternal Vãsudev. 
 
39.17 
“Furthermore, that Shree Krishna Bhagvãn had behaved according to 
dharma, arth,  and kãm.  All  those  who  narrate  or  even  listen  to  the 
charitras of Bhagvãn in  which  He  followed dharma, arth,  and kãm, 
will  be  released  from  all  of  their  sins  and  will  attain Akshardhãm.  
Also,  the  birth,  actions,  and murti of  that Vãsudev  Bhagvãn are  all 
divya.  In fact, and Vãsudev Bhagvãn alone is sarvopari. 
 
39.18 
“This is the fundamental principle of  those  two skandhs.    Even  those 
who   have   attained   the brahm-rup state,   like   Shukji,   must   also 
worship   and   offer bhakti to Shree   Krishna   Bhagvãn.      Also,   as 
mentioned in the tenth skandh, even those like Shukji should narrate 
and listen to the charitras of Bhagvãn.  In fact, Shukji himself has said, 
 
parinishthitopi nairgunya uttam-shloka-leelayã 
gruheeta-chetã rãjarshe ãkhyãnam yad-adheetavãn 
O King (Parikshit)!  Despite being perfectly poised in the nirgun state, having 
been attracted by the leelãs of Bhagvãn, I (Shukdevji) studied the Shreemad 
Bhãgvat. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 536 - 
39.19 
“A person should also keep a firm belief regarding the svarup of that 
Vãsudev Bhagvãn.    If  a  person  has  a  firm  belief  of  the svarup of 
Bhagvãn, and if he happens to commit some sin, then he will be freed 
of   that   sin – because   there   is   always   some   form   of prãyshchit 
prescribed  for  committing  a  sin.    However,  to  realise Bhagvãn as 
nirãkãr is  a  sin  much  greater  than  even  the  five  great  sins.    There is 
no prãyshchit for that sin. 
 
39.20 
“Conversely, if a person realises Bhagvãn to possess a sãkãr and has a 
firm  belief  of  this,  then  even  if  he  happens  to  commit  a  sin,  there  is 
nothing to worry about.  By the grace of Bhagvãn, all of those sins will 
be burnt and his jeev will attain Bhagvãn. 
 
39.21 
“Therefore,  a  person should  keep a  firm  belief  of  the svarup of 
Bhagvãn and  firmly  worship  Him.    This  is  my  message  to  you.    So, 
please remember these words firmly in your lives.” 
 
39.22 
Having given this advice to everyone, Shreeji Mahãrãj departed to 
have His meal. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 39 || 172 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 40 
Offering One Extra Dandvat 
 
40.1 
In  the Samvat year  1880,  on Ãso vad 3  [22
nd
 October,  1823],  Shreeji 
Mahãrãj was  in  His  residence in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.  
After  bathing,  he  put  on  white  clothes,  and  sat  upon  His  seat.    Then, 
after completing His daily routine of performing pujã of Bhagvãn, He 
was  performing dandvats in  the  northern  direction  to Shree  Krishna 
Bhagvãn.  It so happened that on that day, He performed one dandvat 
more than usual.   
 
40.2 
Noticing this, Shuk Muni asked, “Mahãrãj, why did you perform one 
extra dandvat today?” 

GADHADÃ II 
- 537 - 
40.3 
Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “Everyday, after bowing to Shree Krishna 
Bhagvãn, I  used  to  pray, ‘Mahãrãj, if any feelings of ‘I-ness’ and ‘my-
ness’ for this body and its relations exist, then please eradicate them’.  
However,  today  the  following  thought  occurred  to  me:   ‘No other sin 
causes more misery to a person than when he somehow – knowingly or 
unknowingly – harms a bhakta of Bhagvãn by thought, word, or deed’.  
Therefore, I performed one extra dandvat to make up for any mistake 
that may have occurred of knowingly or unknowingly harming some 
bhakta of Bhagvãn by thought, word, or deed. 
 
40.4 
“I have come to the conclusion that the extent of damage and misery 
incurred  as  a  result  of  harming  a bhakta of Bhagvãn is  not  incurred 
by any other sin.  On the other hand, there is no spiritual activity that 
benefits  a  person  and  gives  as  much  happiness  as  that  of  serving  a 
bhakta of Bhagvãn by thought, word, and deed. 
 
40.5 
“It is because of the influence of lobh, mãn, irshyã,  and krodh that  a 
person  harms  a bhakta of Bhagvãn.    Only  a  person  who  does  not 
possess  these  four  inner  enemies  can  respect  a bhakta of Bhagvãn.  
Therefore, a person who wishes to experience supreme happiness in 
this  very  body  and  also  experience  supreme  happiness  after  death 
should never harm a bhakta of Bhagvãn by thought, word, or deed. 
 
40.6 
“However, if a person does somehow harm a bhakta of Bhagvãn, then 
he  should  verbally  pray  to  him  for  forgiveness;  and  physically  and 
mentally,  he  should  perform dandvats before  him  and  determine  to 
never harm him again.  However, he should not behave in such a way 
that he performs dandvats after harming someone once, only to then 
harm him again and perform dandvats again. 
 
40.7 
“So that you remember this fact daily, from today, all sãdhus and  all 
bhaktas should observe the following vow:  After performing pujã of 
Bhagvãn,  a  person  should  perform dandvats according  to  his  daily 
practice.    After  this,  to  make  up  for  knowingly  and  unknowingly 
harming  a bhakta of Bhagvãn during  the  day,  by  thought,  word,  or 

GADHADÃ II 
- 538 - 
deed,  he  should  perform  one  extra dandvat every  day.    This  is  my 
ãgnã; so please do abide by it.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 40 || 173 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 41 
A Bone Is The Form Of Mãn 
 
41.1 
In  the Samvat year  1880,  on Kãrtik vad 11  [28
th
 November,  1823], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  large  decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  west-facing  rooms  of  Dãdã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.  He was wearing garlands of yellow flowers around His neck, 
and tassels of yellow flowers had been inserted in His pãgh.  A sabhã 
of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before Him. 
 
41.2 
Out  of  compassion,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  began  to  preach  to  His 
bhaktas, saying, “When a person who wishes to worship Bhagvãn 
receives an opportunity to serve Bhagvãn and His bhaktas, he should 
serve   them   considering   it   to   be   his   extremely   great   fortune.  
Moreover,  he  should  do  so  only  with bhakti,  for  the  sake  of  pleasing 
Bhagvãn and for his own kalyãn – not for the sake of receiving praise 
from others. 
 
41.3
 “However,  the  nature  of  a  person  is  such  that  he  only  enjoys  doing 
that  which satisfies  his  pride.    Without  that,  he  does  not  enjoy 
performing  even bhakti of Bhagvãn.    For  example,  a  dog  takes  a  dry 
bone  to  an  isolated  place  to  chew  on.    As  a  result  of  the  chewing,  its 
mouth  is  grazed  and  the  bone  becomes  covered  in  blood.    Then, 
licking the bone, the dog becomes overjoyed.  But, little does the fool 
realise, ‘The taste that I am enjoying is that of the blood from my own 
mouth’.    In  the  same  way,  even  a bhakta of Bhagvãn is  unable  to 
abandon  the  bone  (pride).    In  fact,  all  the  spiritual  activities  he 

GADHADÃ II 
- 539 - 
performs are governed by pride; they are not performed for the sole 
purpose   of   pleasing Bhagvãn,   while   thinking   of   them   as bhakti 
towards Bhagvãn.    Moreover,  of  all  the bhakti that  he  does  offer  to 
Bhagvãn, he does so only when it nourishes his pride, but not for the 
sole purpose of pleasing Bhagvãn. 
 
41.4 
“There must be very  few bhaktas like Ratanji  and  Miyãji  who  offer 
bhakti to Bhagvãn solely for the purpose of pleasing Bhagvãn without 
any   cravings   for   praise.      However,   not   everyone   is   capable   of 
abandoning the taste of praise.” 
 
41.5 
In reference to this, Muktãnand Swãmi recited a verse by Tulsidãs: 
 
kanak tajyo kãmini tajyo, tajyo dhãtuko sang 
tulsi laghu bhojan kari, jeeve mãn ke rang 
Tulsi says:  he has abandoned women, wealth, and possessions. 
But, he lives on praise alone, the greatest of all obsessions. 
 
41.6 
Hearing this verse, Shreeji Mahãrãj added, “The enjoyment which a 
person  experiences  from  pride  cannot  be  obtained  from  any  other 
object.  Therefore, amongst all bhaktas, a person who abandons pride 
and  worships Bhagvãn should  be  known  to  be  an  extremely  great 
bhakta.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 41 || 174 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 42 
Sagun And Nirgun Aspects Of Akshar 
  
42.1 
In the Samvat year 1880,  on Mãgshar vad 12  [29
th
 December, 1823], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   the   veranda 
outside  the  east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.  
He was dressed entirely in white clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 540 - 
 
42.2 
Then, Bhagvadãnand Swãmi asked Shreeji Mahãrãj, “In what way do 
countless millions of brahmãnds dwell within each and every pore of 
Bhagvãn?    Also,  where  in  the brahmãnds do  the avatãrs of Bhagvãn 
occur?” 
 
42.3 
Shreeji   Mahãrãj   replied,  “There  are  two  aspects  of Purushottam 
Bhagvãn’s Akshardhãm.  The first is the sagun aspect, and the other is 
the nirgun aspect.    On  the  other  hand, Purushottam  Nãrãyan cannot 
be  described  as nirgun.    The  distinction  of sagun and nirgun applies 
only to Akshar. 
 
42.4 
“The nirgun aspect Akshar has  an  extremely  subtle svarup,  smaller 
than  even  an  atom,  while  the sagun svarup is much  larger  than  even 
the  largest  of  objects.    Countless  millions  of brahmãnds dwell  like 
mere atoms in each and every hair of that Akshar.  It is not that those 
brahmãnds become  small  compared  to Akshar;  they  still  remain 
encircled by the eight barriers (jad prakruti).  But, it is because of the 
extreme  vastness  of Akshar that  those brahmãnds appear  so  small.  
Take  Mount  Girnãr  as an  example.    Compare  to  Mount  Meru,  it 
appears  to  be  extremely  small.    However,  compared  to  Mount  Lokã-
Lok,  Mount  Meru  itself  appears  to  be  extremely  small.    In  the  same 
way, the brahmãnds remain exactly as they are, but in comparison to 
the  extreme  vastness  of Akshar,  they  appear  to  be  extremely  small.  
This is why they are described as being like atoms. 
 
42.5 
“Akshar-Brahm itself  is  like  the  sun;  when  the  sun  rises,  all  ten 
directions  can  be  determined  in  relation  to  it.   Akshardhãm is  like 
that; above, below, in all four sides of that Akshar – in all directions – 
are millions of brahmãnds. 
 
42.6 
“Moreover, Bhagvãn forever  remains  present  in  that Akshardhãm; 
and His wish always prevails.  While remaining in Akshardhãm itself, 
He   takes   birth   in   whatever svarup is   required   in   whichever 
brahmãnd.  For example, Shree Krishna Bhagvãn has only one svarup, 

GADHADÃ II 
- 541 - 
but  during  the rãs-leelã he  assumed  as  many svarups as  there  were 
gopis.      In   the   same   way, Purushottam   Bhagvãn takes   birth   in 
whatever svarup is required in  whichever brahmãnd – while  at  the 
same  time  remaining  in Akshardhãm.    Actually,  He  Himself  forever 
dwells in Akshardhãm.  Wherever that svarup of Purushottam resides, 
is the very centre of Akshardhãm.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 42 || 175 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 43 
Becoming Brahm-Svarup 
 
43.1 
In  the Samvat year  1880,  on Posh sud 4  [5
th
 January,  1824],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  seated  on  a  mattress  with  a  large, 
cylindrical pillow at the residence of the bhaktas of Ayodhyã in Dãdã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from various places, 
had  gathered  before  Him.    Premãnand  Swãmi  was  singing kirtans to 
the accompaniment of a sarodã. 
 
43.2
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “Let  us  conduct  a  question-answer 
discussion.”  So, Shreeji Mahãrãj Himself asked, “A bhakta of Bhagvãn 
who  is gunãtit behaves  only  as  the ãtmã,  above  the  influence  of  the 
three guns – above sattva-gun in the form of vairãgya, above rajo-gun 
in the form of desires for vishays, and above tamo-gun in the form of 
passiveness.    He  has  absolutely  no  thoughts, and  experiences a  state 
like sushupti.    Now,  does  such  a nirgun bhakta who  behaves  as  the 
ãtmã in this way have love for Bhagvãn, or not?  That is the question.” 
 
43.3 
Muktãnand Swãmi replied, “A person who behaves as the ãtmã does 
have love for Bhagvãn.” 
 
43.4 
Hearing the reply, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Is the love of a bhakta, 
who  behaves  as  the ãtmã,  of  the  same  qualities  as  the ãtmã,  or 
different?” 

GADHADÃ II 
- 542 - 
43.5 
Muktãnand Swãmi replied, “That love has the same qualities as the 
ãtmã.” 
 
43.6 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then explained, “Regarding the love developed for 
Bhagvãn while behaving as the ãtmã, Madhav-Ãchãrya, Nimbãrk, and 
Vallabh-Ãchãrya   have   all   described   that   love   as brahm-svarup.  
Therefore,  only  a  person  who  has  love  for Bhagvãn having  become 
gunãtit brahm-svarup.  Such is the principle of the great ãchãryas.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 43 || 176 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 44 
The Characteristics Of Religious And Demonic People 
 
44.1 
In  the Samvat year  1880,  on Posh sud 8  [9
th
 January,  1824],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  the  veranda  outside  the 
east-facing  rooms  of  Dãdã  Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was 
dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
44.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked Muktãnand Swãmi, “When a person 
perceives  an avgun in  a bhakta, does  that  person  perceive  the  same 
amount of avgun in that bhakta as he had noticed previously, or does 
he perceive more avgun?” 
 
44.3 
Muktãnand  Swãmi  replied,  “Apparently,  he  perceives  the  same 
amount of avgun as he previously perceived.” 
 
44.4
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  said,  “You  have  missed  the  point  of  the 
question.    If  he  perceives  exactly  the  same  amount  of avgun,  then 
how can you say that he has perceived an avgun?  In actual fact, it is 
due  to  the  influence  of  unpleasant desh, kãl, kriyã,  and sang,  that  his 
intellect  becomes  spoiled;  and  that  is  why  he  perceives  more avgun.  

GADHADÃ II 
- 543 - 
In   this   situation,   a   person   should   realise   that   the   blemish   of 
unpleasant circumstances has ruined his intellect. 
 
44.5 
“Moreover,  I  personally  feel, ‘If  a  person  previously  has  kept  the 
company of the great sant or has had the darshan of Bhagvãn, then he 
will  only  perceive  his  own  avgun but  will  never  perceive  avgun in  any 
other bhakta of Bhagvãn’.  A person with such characteristics should 
be known to be religious. 
 
44.6 
“On the other hand, a person who is demonic never perceives even a 
single avgun within himself; instead, he perceives only avgun in other 
bhaktas.    A  person  with  such  an  intellect  should  be  known  to  be 
demonic.  If such a demonic person happens to be in satsang, or if he 
stays in the company of sãdhus, he will be similar to Kãlnemi, Rãvan, 
and Rãhu; but, he will not be influenced by the company of sãdhus. 
 
44.7 
“Therefore, a person who is a strict bhakta of Bhagvãn perceives only 
his own avgun; he never notices the avgun of other bhaktas.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 44 || 177 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 45 
The Ãgnã Of Remaining Attentive 
 
45.1 
In  the Samvat year  1880,  on Posh vad 1 [17
th
 January,  1824],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  the  veranda  outside  the 
east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was 
dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
45.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “All of you munis, brahm-chãris, satsangi 
grahasthas, pãrshads, and the bhaktas of Ayodhyã are said to be mine.  
So, if I was not attentive in having all of you behave accordingly, and 

GADHADÃ II 
- 544 - 
if you were to then behave waywardly, I would not be able to tolerate 
this.    In  actual  fact,  I  do  not  want  even  the  slightest  imperfection  to 
remain  in  those  who  are said  to  be  mine.    However,  you  should also 
remain very attentive, because if you allow even a little carelessness, 
your footing in satsang will not last. 
 
45.3
 “Furthermore, as you are bhaktas of Bhagvãn,  I  do  not  wish  to  leave 
any  form  of  improper svabhãvs within  your  hearts.    Also,  I  do  not 
wish  to  allow  any  trace  of  any  of Mãyã’s three gun,  ten indriyas,  ten 
prãns, four antah-karans, five bhuts, panch-vishays, and the devs of the 
fourteen loks to  remain.   Instead,  I  wish  to  make  all  of  you such  that 
you  offer bhakti to Bhagvãn and  realise  your  true svarup to  be  the 
ãtmã,  which  is  eternal  and  is  free  from  all  of  these mãyik flaws.    In 
fact, I wish not to allow any influence of mãyã to remain within you.  
If  all  of  your  imperfections  are  not  eradicated  in  this  very  lifetime, 
then  I  will  take  you  to Badrikãshram,  where  all  of  your  worldly 
desires will be burnt to ashes by performing tap; or I will take you to 
Shvet-Dvip and  burn  all  of  your  worldly  desires  to  ashes  by  having 
you perform tap with the niranna-muktas.  However, I do not wish to 
allow  any  love  for  anything  except Bhagvãn to  remain.    For  this 
reason, all the bhaktas and munis should remain attentive.” 
 
45.4 
Having delivered this talk, Shreeji Mahãrãj returned to His residence. 
 
45.5 
Later,  in  the  evening  of  that  same  day,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  held  another 
sabhã.  After the ãrti was completed, He said, “By performing sãttvik 
karmas,  a  person  goes  to  Dev-Lok;  by  performing rãjas karmas,  a 
person  goes  to  Mrutyu-Lok;  and  by  performing tãmas  karmas,  a 
person  goes  to  the  lower loks.    However,  someone  may  doubt, ‘If by 
performing   rãjas   karmas   a   person   attains   Mrutyu-Lok,   then   that 
suggests  that  all  those  of  Mrutyu-Lok  should  experience the  same  joys 
and miseries’.  So, the answer to this is that although there is only one 
particular rajo-gun, countless types of distinctions are created within 
it   due   to   the   influence   of   differing   factors,   like desh and kãl.  
Therefore,  it  is  not  the  case that  there  is  one  certain  type  of rãjas 

GADHADÃ II 
- 545 - 
karma.  In actual fact, the type of karmas performed varies according 
to the factors of desh, kãl, kriyã, and sang. 
 
45.6 
“Having said this, if a person performs some karma which displeases 
the sant of Bhagvãn’s or an avatãr of Bhagvãn, he will suffer miseries 
similar to those of Yampuri in this very body here in Mrutyu-Lok.  On 
the other hand, if a person performs a karma by which Bhagvãn and 
His bhaktas are  pleased,  then  he  will  enjoy  bliss  similar  to  that  of 
attaining Akshardhãm in this very body. 
 
45.7
 “Furthermore, if a person were to displease Bhagvãn and  His sant, 
then despite the fact that he had performed such karmas that would 
have  led  him  to Svarg,  all  those karmas would  be  destroyed  and  he 
would  instead  be sent  to Narak.    Conversely,  if  a  person  were  to 
perform  a karma by  which Bhagvãn and  His sant are  pleased,  then 
even  if  he  were  destined  to  fall  into Narak,  all  of  his  impure karmas 
would   be   destroyed   and   he   would   instead   attain Akshardhãm.  
Therefore,  a  person  who  is  wise  should  behave  only  in  a  way  that 
would please Bhagvãn and His bhaktas.  He should even advise all of 
his  relatives, ‘We should behave only in a way that would please 
Bhagvãn and His sant, and in a way by which they would shower their 
grace upon us’. 
 
45.8 
“In fact, Agni must  have  also  pleased Bhagvãn and  His  sant,  because 
only  then  would  he  have  attained  his  light.   Surya, Chandra,  and  all 
others  who  possess  light,  must  also  have  pleased Bhagvãn and  His 
sant by  performing religious karmas,  as  only  then  would  they  have 
attained such light.  In fact, all of those who are happy in Dev-Lok and 
Mrutyu-Lok must have pleased Bhagvãn and His sant, because it is by 
their grace that they are happy.   
 
45.9 
“Therefore, a person who aspires  for  the  good  of  his  own ãtmã 
should observe the svadharma prescribed in the shãstras, and do only 
that which pleases Bhagvãn and His sant.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 45 || 178 || 

GADHADÃ II 
- 546 - 
Gadhadã II – 46 
Progression and Regression Does Not Affect A Sat-Purush 
 
46.1 
In the Samvat year 1880, on Posh vad 11 [26
th
 January 1824], Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  the  veranda  outside  the 
west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was 
dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes,  and  had covered  Himself  with  a 
yellow rajãi made of chhint.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas 
from  various  places,  had  gathered  before  Him.    Some  of  the sãdhus 
were singing kirtans to the accompaniment of a jhãnjh and mrudang. 
 
46.2 
After the singing concluded, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “A sat-purush living 
in  this  world  is  not  pleased  or  pained  upon  seeing  the  worldly 
progress or regress of a person.  However, when someone’s mind 
falls  back  from  the  path  of Bhagvãn,  he  does  become  grieved.    After 
all, life is so short; and if a person’s afterlife is ruined, it would indeed 
be a great loss for that person. 
 
46.3 
“In fact, Bhagvãn assumes avatãrs upon  earth  for  the  purpose  of 
establishing dharma,  and  not  simply  for  the  establishment  of  the 
dharma of a person’s varna and ãshram.  After all, even the ãchãryas 
of pravrutti dharma,  such  as  the  Saptarshi,  have  established  the 
dharma of  the  four varna and ãshrams.    However, Bhagvãn does  not 
assume avatãrs solely   for   that   purpose;   He   assumes avatãrs to 
develop the dharma of His ekãntik bhaktas. 
 
46.4 
“For such ekãntik  bhaktas,  leaving  the  body  is  not  considered  to  be 
death; for them, falling from that ekãntik dharma is true death.  This 
occurs  when  a  dislike  arises  in  the  heart  towards Bhagvãn or  His 
sant.    That bhakta should  then  be  known  to  have  fallen  from  the 
dharma of ekãntik bhaktas.  For example, if he has fallen due to krodh, 
it should be known that he has received the body of a snake; and if he 
has  fallen  due  to kãm,  it should  be  known  that he has  taken  birth  as 
an evil spirit or a demon. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 547 - 
46.5 
“Nevertheless, despite having attained such bodies and having fallen 
from ekãntik dharma, those who observe dharma or perform tap will 
attain    Dev-Lok    due    to    their    observance    of dharma or    their 
performance  of tap.    However,  a  person  who  has  a  dislike  towards 
Bhagvãn or  His  sant  will  certainly  not  attain  the dhãm of Bhagvãn.  
On the other hand, even if a person has committed the five great sins, 
if he has not perceived an avgun in Bhagvãn or His sant, then his sins 
will be burned, and he will dwell in the dhãm of Bhagvãn.  Therefore, 
to  perceive avgun in Bhagvãn and  His bhakta is  a  greater  sin  than 
committing the five great sins.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 46 || 179 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 47 
The Desire To Perform Bhakti After Becoming Brahm-Rup 
 
47.1 
In  the Samvat year  1880,  on Mahã vad 10  [24
th
 February  1824], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   the   veranda 
outside  the  east-facing rooms of Dada Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.  
He  was dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes  and  had  covered  Himself 
with  a  yellow rajãi made  of chhint.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
47.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “If a person has a group of sãdhus staying 
with  him,  and  if  he  can  sincerely  look  after  them  graciously,  those 
sãdhus will happily stay with him.  However, if he does not know how 
to look after them, they will not stay with him. 
 
47.3 
“Furthermore, if a sãdhu is  eager  to  attain moksh,  he  would  become 
increasingly  overjoyed  when  I  do  something  that  may  upset  him  or 
when  I  criticise  the vishays.    For  example,  Muktãnand  Swãmi  has 
contracted  tuberculosis,  and  so  he  is  restricted  from  eating  yoghurt, 
milk,  and  any  sweet  or  fried  foods.    A  wise  person  would  think  to 
himself, ‘This disease has restricted all tasty food and drink; therefore I 

GADHADÃ II 
- 548 - 
wonder if I have actually attained the company of a great sãdhu in the 
appearance of tuberculosis!’  This  is  how  a  wise  person  would  view 
the  situation.     This is  because  a  person’s  desires  regarding  the 
genitals   and   the   stomach   are   characteristics   of   an asat person.  
However, tuberculosis is disease that removes both flaws.  Therefore, 
a mumukshu should not feel hurt when a sat-purush, in the same way 
as that disease, criticises vishays. 
 
47.4 
“Also, if a person is staying with a senior sãdhu due to the temptation 
of obtaining tasty food or drink, or due to the temptation of obtaining 
nice  clothes,  or  due  to  the  temptation  of  collecting  objects  that  he 
likes,  then  he  should  not  be  considered  a sãdhu at  all.    Instead,  he 
should be known to be an extremely wretched person and like a dog.  
A  person  who  has  such  corrupt  intentions  will  ultimately  fall  from 
satsang. 
 
47.5 
“Furthermore, if someone should give a sãdhu a nice object, a person 
who  becomes  jealous  as  well  as  the  person  who  is  greedy  for  the 
panch-vishays are   both   much   worse   than   a   person   who   has 
committed  the  five  great  sins.    Therefore,  a  person  who  is  wise 
should  remain  in  the  company  of sãdhus and  not  have  any  impure 
intentions   within.      After   all,   this sabhã is   like   the sabhã in 
Badrikãshram and Shvet-Dvip; if a person’s worldly desires are not 
eradicated here, where else will he be able to eradicate them? 
 
47.6 
“Moreover, our jeevs have  previously  indulged  in  the panch-vishays 
through  countless  bodies,  as devs and  humans.    Nevertheless,  we 
have not been happy with those vishays.  Therefore, now that we are 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn, indulging in the vishays for a further year, or two 
years,  or  maybe  even  five  years  will  still  not  fulfil  us.    It  is  as  if  the 
earth has been split down to Pãtãl, and we begin to fill it with water, 
it  can  never  be  filled.    Similarly,  the indriyas have  never  become 
satisfied  by  the vishays,  and  they  never  will  be.    So,  a  person  should 
eradicate  his  attachment  to  the vishays.    Furthermore,  he  should 
consider  the  qualities  of  the sãdhu who  speaks  to  him  harshly  and 

GADHADÃ II 
- 549 - 
should  not  think  unkindly  of  him.    This  is  explained  in  the  following 
kirtan composed  by  Muktãnand  Swãmi: ‘Shuli Upar Shayan Karãve 
Toy  Sãdhu-Ne  Sange  Rahiye  Re...’ – a  person  should  remain  in  the 
company  of sãdhus, even  if  he  has  to  suffer  the  pain  of  a shuli.  
Therefore, a person should take hold of this opportunity and die only 
after  eradicating  his  impure  desires;  he  should not  die  with  his 
impure desires still remaining. 
 
47.7 
“Having said this though, a person should keep the following desire: 
‘After leaving this body, I want to become brahm-rup  like  Nãrad,  the 
Sanakãdik, and Shukji, and offer bhakti to Bhagvãn’ .    During  this 
process,  even  if  he  has  to  go  to  Brahm-Lok  or  Indra-Lok,  there  is 
nothing to worry about.  For example, if a person goes to answer the 
call of nature, and then falls headfirst into the gutter, he should take a 
bath  and  become  pure  again;  he  should  not remain  in  the  filth.  
Similarly, if a person has pure desires and as a result attains Brahm-
Lok  or  Indra-Lok,  he  should  think, ‘I have fallen headfirst into the 
gutter’.    Thinking  in  this  way,  he  should  discard  the  pleasures  of 
Brahm-Lok and Indra-Lok using the strength of his pure desires and 
make his way to the dhãm of Bhagvãn.  He should be determined not 
to stop anywhere in between. 
 
47.8 
“Also, just as the grahasthas or tyãgis serve us, we should also realise 
their   greatness.      For   example,   Mulji   Brahm-Chãri   realises   my 
greatness  and  serves  me.    In  the  same  way,  I  realise  his  greatness.  
Therefore, as  the grahasthas serve us  by  providing  food  and  clothes, 
we  should  also  realize  their  greatness  and  serve  them  by  preaching 
to them.  In this way, we should develop friendship among bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn by realising the greatness of each other.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 47 || 180 || 
 
 

GADHADÃ II 
- 550 - 
Gadhadã II – 48 
‘Vandu Sahajãnand’  
Taking Birth In The Company Of Sant 
   
48.1
 In  the Samvat year  1880,  on Mahã vad 14  [28
th
 February  1824], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   the   veranda 
outside  the  east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.  
He was dressed entirely in white clothes and was wearing new, white 
kanthis made  from tulsi beads,  around  His  neck.    In  addition  to  this, 
tassels of yellow flowers decorated His pãgh, and garlands of flowers 
were   hanging   around   His   neck.      A sabhã of munis,   as   well   as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him.  
 
48.2 
In  the sabhã,  Premãnand Swãmi was singing ‘Vandu  Sahajãnand  Ras 
Rup, Anupam Sãr-Ne Re Lol...’ – kirtans useful for dhyãn.  After he had 
finished singing, Shreeji Mahãrãj commented, “The kirtans you  sang 
were  very  wonderful.    After  listening  to  them  I  thought  in  my  mind, 
‘Since this sãdhu thinks about Bhagvãn’s svarup in this way, let me get 
up and perform dhyãn before him’. 
 
48.3
 “If a person is able to think about Bhagvãn in his antah-karans in this 
way,  and  if  he  were  to  die  while  still  holding  such  a  desire  for 
Bhagvãn,  he  would definitely  not  have  to  take  another  birth.    If  he 
engages   in   such dhyãn of Bhagvãn,   he   has   certainly   attained 
Akshardhãm while  alive.    In  addition,  he  can  be  said  to  be  in  the 
process of becoming a niranna-mukta just like the niranna-muktas in 
Shvet-Dvip.  Such  a  person  performs  the  bodily  activities  that  are 
necessary without effort.  In fact, a person who is able to think about 
Bhagvãn’s svarup like this has become fulfilled and has nothing more 
left to achieve. 
 
48.4
 “On the other hand, if a person dies while thinking about things other 
than Bhagvãn,  there  will  be  no  end  to  his  miseries  for  countless 
millions  of  years.    So,  now  that  such  an  opportunity  has  arisen,  a 
person  should  seize  it  and,  after  discarding  any  thoughts  about 
objects other than Bhagvãn, should think about His svarup only. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 551 - 
48.5
 “However, if a person is unable to think about Bhagvãn’s svarup,  he 
should  remain  in  the  company  of  a sãdhu who  possesses dharma, 
gnãn, vairãgya,  and bhakti.    As  for  myself,  I  have  only  this  desire 
within: ‘When I abandon this body, although there will be no reason for 
me  to  take  birth  again,  I  feel  in  my  heart  that  I  should  make  a  reason 
and take birth in the company of such sãdhus’.  This is all I wish for. 
 
48.6 
“However, if a person is able to think about Bhagvãn as described in 
the above kirtan, then he is freed from the bondage of Kãl, karma, and 
Mãyã.  In fact, regardless of the family in which he person happens to 
be   born,   his   parents   should   also   be   considered   to   be   fulfilled.  
Conversely,  a  person  who  thinks  about  the vishays,  and  does  not 
think of Bhagvãn, should be considered as being totally lost. 
 
48.7 
“After all, regardless of the life-form in which a person takes birth, he 
will be able to have a wife, a son, and possessions such as wealth and 
other  objects.    However,  the  company  of  a sãdhu who  is  knower  of 
brahm,  as  well  as  the  direct darshan and  thought  of Shree Vãsudev 
Bhagvãn are   extremely   rare.      Therefore,   there   is   no   greater 
advantage   of   possessing   this   human   body   than   being   able   to 
constantly  think  about Bhagvãn in  the  heart – just  as  a  person 
engrossed  in  the vishays constantly  think  about  them  in  the antah-
karans.    Such  a  person  is  also  the  greatest  amongst  all bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn.    Even  if  he  does  indulge  in  the panch-vishays,  all  would  be 
related only to Bhagvãn.  His ears wish to continuously listen to talks 
related  to Bhagvãn;  his  skin  wishes to  touch Bhagvãn;  his  eyes  with 
to  have  the darshan of Bhagvãn and  His sant;  his  tongue  wishes  to 
taste  the prasãd  of Bhagvãn;  and  his  nose  wishes  to  smell  the 
fragrance  of  flowers  and tulsi which  have  been  offered  to Bhagvãn.  
Apart  from Bhagvãn,  he  considers  nothing  else  to  be  a  source  of 
happiness.    A  person  who  behaves  in  this  way,  can  be  called  an 
ekãntik bhakta of Bhagvãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 48 || 181 || 

GADHADÃ II 
- 552 - 
Gadhadã II – 49 
Differences Between Bhagvãn’s Svarup And Mãyik Svarups 
 
49.1 
In  the Samvat year  1880,  on Fãgan sud 2  [1
st
 March  1824],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress  with  a  large, 
cylindrical  pillow  that  had  been  placed  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on 
the  veranda  outside  the  west-facing medi in  front  of  the mandir of 
Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He 
was dressed entirely in white clothes, and a garland of white flowers 
was hanging from His pãgh.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
49.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “There is a great difference between the 
pratyaksha svarup of Bhagvãn and mãyik svarup.    However,  those 
who  are  ignorant  and  those  who  are  utter  fools  consider Bhagvãn’s 
svarup and mãyik svarups to  be  the  same.    Those  who see mãyik 
svarups and  those  who  think  about mãyik svarups spend  countless 
millions of years wandering in the cycle of births and deaths.  In the 
comparison, those who do the darshan of Bhagvãn’s svarup and those 
who  think  about  it,  escape  from  the  bondage of Kãl, karma,  and, 
Mãyã; attain Akshardhãm; and become pãrshads of Bhagvãn.  It is for 
this  reason  that  my  mind  never  becomes  full  with kathãs, kirtans, 
talks related to Bhagvãn, or dhyãn of Bhagvãn.  All of you should also 
do the same.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 49 || 182 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 50 
The Fundamental Principle 
Love For A Sant 
 
50.1 
In  the Samvat year  1880,  on  the  night  of Chaitra vad 2  [15
th
 April 
1824], Swãmi Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on the veranda 
outside the west-facing medi in front of the mandir of Shree Vãsudev-

GADHADÃ II 
- 553 - 
Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed 
entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
50.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “As I consider all of you to be mine, today 
I am going to reveal to you my fundamental principle.”  He then 
continued, “Just as rivers merge into the sea, just as a sati and a moth 
burn  in  a  fire,  and  just  as  the  brave  sacrifice  themselves on  the 
battlefield,  in  the  same  way,  I  have  kept  my ãtmã absorbed  in  the 
pure  and  perfect brahm.    I  have  also  forever  attached  myself  with 
undying  love  to Purushottam Bhagvãn – who  possesses  a  definite 
svarup – and  to  His bhaktas dwelling  in  the  radiant Akshardhãm.    In 
fact,  I  have  no  love  for  anything  other  than  them.    This  is  what  I 
constantly experience. 
 
50.3
 “Outwardly, I do not make a display of the intensity of my tyãg.  
However, when I look into my heart and towards the hearts of other 
bhaktas, even the senior paramhans and senior sãnkhya-yogi  women 
all  seem  to  have  some  trace  of  the  world  remaining – whereas 
worldly  desires  never  arise  in  my  heart;  not  even  in  my  dreams.    It 
also seems to me that no one is capable of making me falter from my 
bhakti towards Bhagvãn and His bhaktas. 
 
50.4 
“In  addition,  even  before  a  person  had  been  graced  with  the 
attainment  of Bhagvãn, Kãl (a  power  of Bhagvãn)  was  unable  to 
destroy  the jeev;  karmas were  unable  to  destroy  the jeev;  not  even 
Mãyã was  able  to  absorb  the jeev within  itself.    So,  having  attained 
Bhagvãn,  why  should  a  person  worry  about Kãl, karma,  and Mãyã?  
Bearing this in mind, I have become determined that I do not want to 
develop love for anyone except Bhagvãn and His bhaktas. 
 
50.5 
“Furthermore, I do  not  wish  to  leave  any  trace  of  the  world  in  the 
hearts  of  whosoever  keeps  my  company.    This  is  because  I  only  get 
along with those whose determination is similar to mine.  However, if 

GADHADÃ II 
- 554 - 
a  person  has  desires  for  worldly  pleasures,  that  even  if  I  try  to 
develop  love  for  that  person,  I  cannot  do  so.    Therefore,  only  those 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn who  are  free  of  worldly  desires  are  dear  to  me.  
What I have just told you is my personal principle.” 
 
50.6 
In this way, Shreeji Mahãrãj talked to His bhaktas for the sake of their 
enlightenment. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 50 || 183 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 51 
The Characteristics Of A Person Who Behaves As The Ãtmã 
 
51.1 
In  the Samvat year  1880,  on  the  night  of Chaitra vad 9  [22
nd
 April 
1824],  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress 
with  a  large,  cylindrical  pillow  that  had  been  placed  on  a  decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  south-facing  rooms  of  Dãdã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in   Gadhadã.      A sabhã of munis,   as well   as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
51.2 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  the paramhans, “Often, when the jeev 
enters sushupti,  it  experiences  profound  peace,  whereas  at  other 
times, even when it enters sushupti, its restlessness does not subside.  
What is the reason for this?  That is my question.” 
 
51.3 
The  senior paramhans attempted  to  answer  the  question,  but  were 
unable to give a precise answer. 
 
51.4 
So, Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “That is due to the increase of the force 
of rajo-gun.    So,  even  during  the  state  of sushupti,  the  disturbance  of 
rajo-gun joins  with tamo-gun.    As  a  result,  a  person  experiences  a 
feeling of restlessness even within sushupti.  Therefore, as long as the 
influence   of   the gun remains   within   a   person,   he   will   never 

GADHADÃ II 
- 555 - 
experience  happiness;  he  only  becomes  happy  when  he  behaves  as 
the ãtmã.” 
 
51.5 
Then,  Muktãnand  Swãmi  asked,  “What  are  the  characteristics  of 
someone who behaves as the ãtmã?” 
 
51.6 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “No one is said to be as powerful as Shiv and 
Brahmã.    In  fact,  they  are  the gurus of  even Nãrad;  it  is  difficult  for 
others  to  behave  as  they  do – as brahm-svarup.    Having  said  that, 
when the eight factors of desh, kãl, kriyã, sang, dhyãn, mantra, dikshã, 
and shãstra became  unpleasant,  the harmful  influence  caused  great 
distress in the hearts of even Shiv and Brahmã.  Therefore, regardless 
of how nirgun a person may be, or even if he behaves as the ãtmã, if 
he   encounters   unpleasant   circumstances,   he   will   most   certainly 
experience  distress  within.    So,  no  one  can  ever  become  happy  by 
disobeying the disciplines laid down by the great sant. 
 
51.7 
“For this reason, all tyãgis should  abide  by  the dharma of tyãgis,  all 
grahasthas should abide by the dharma of grahasthas, and all women 
should abide by the dharma of women.  Even in this, a person will not 
become happy if he behaves less than what is prescribed; nor will he 
become happy by behaving beyond what is prescribed.  After all, the 
dharma prescribed  in shãstras has been  written  exactly  as Bhagvãn 
has narrated; therefore, there can be no discrepancy in it.  Moreover, 
they  are  prescribed  in  such  a  way  that  they  are  easy  to  observe.  
Therefore,   if   a   person   observes   too   much   or   too   little,   he   will 
certainly become unhappy. 
 
51.8
 “So, only a person who follows the commands of a sat-purush can be 
said to be under the influence of pleasant circumstances.  To deviate 
from    those    commands    is    the    very    definition    of    unpleasant 
circumstances.  Therefore, only a person who follows the commands 
of a sat-purush is behaving as the ãtmã.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 51 || 184 || 

GADHADÃ II 
- 556 - 
Gadhadã II – 52 
That Which Is Appropriate For A Tyãgi And Grahastha 
Leave Irshyã And Perform Bhakti With Shraddhã 
 
52.1 
In the Samvat year 1880, on Chaitra vad 11 [24
th
 April 1824], Shreeji 
Mahãrãj arrived at Lakshmi-Vãdi on horseback from Dãdã Khãchar’s 
darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  sat  on  a  square  platform  and  was  dressed 
entirely  in  white  clothes.    He  was  also  wearing  a  garland  of  flowers 
around His neck, and a tassel of flowers decorated His pãgh.  A sabhã 
of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before   Him.      Some   of   the munis were   singing kirtans to   the 
accompaniment of a jhãnjh and mrudang. 
 
52.2 
After  the munis had finished singing, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “I wish to 
speak now, so please listen.  In this world, the path of a tyãgi and the 
path of a grahastha are both different.  The path of a grahastha is not 
appropriate for a tyãgi, and the path of a tyãgi is not appropriate for a 
grahastha.  A person who is wise will realise this, but others will not. 
 
52.3 
“Now,  I  shall  explain  the  distinctions.    Wealth  and  property; 
elephants  and  horses;  cow  and  buffaloes;  houses  and  mansions;  a 
wife and children; and lavish clothes and jewellery are all suitable for 
a grahastha.  However, to live in the forest; to keep no clothes except 
a loincloth; to wear a hat on his head; to shave off his hair, beard, and 
moustache;   to    wear   saffron-coloured   clothes;    and    to    tolerate 
someone swearing  or  throwing  dust  at  him  are  most  suitable  for  a 
tyãgi.    However,  although  these  are  suitable  for  a tyãgi,  they  are  in 
fact  inappropriate  for  a grahastha.    Therefore,  a  person  who  has 
abandoned   the   world   and   become   a tyãgi should   think, ‘Which 
ãshram do I belong to?’  A  wise  person  should  think  about  this;  he 
should not stray onto some inappropriate path like a fool. 
 
52.4 
“Moreover, if a wise person is disciplined by someone, he would in 
turn  consider  his  qualities.    On  the  other  hand,  if  someone  offers 

GADHADÃ II 
- 557 - 
some  useful  advice  to  a  fool,  the  fool  would  be  offended.    In  that 
respect,  Mulji  Brahm-Chãri  and  Ratanji  are  never  offended;  that  is 
why I get along very well with them. 
 
52.5 
“Also, I like a person who performs sevã with shraddhã.  Conversely, 
if  someone  who  does  not  have shraddhã were  to  bring  me  a  meal,  I 
would not like the food; or if they were to bring some clothes, I would 
not like to wear them; or if they were to perform my pujã, I would not 
like that pujã.  However, if someone offers something with shraddhã, 
I like it very much. 
 
52.6 
“Furthermore, even if someone offers bhakti with shraddhã,  if  he 
becomes jealous of someone else who comes to offer bhakti, then I do 
not  like  that.    Therefore,  I  very  much  prefer  a  person  who  offers 
bhakti with shraddhã and without jealousy.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 52 || 185 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 53 
Not Being Able To Perceive Avgun  
 
53.1 
In  the Samvat year  1880,  on Vaishãkh sud 5  [3
rd
 May  1824],  Swãmi 
Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting upon a mattress with a large, 
cylindrical  pillow  in  His  residence  in  Dãdã  Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Gadhadã.  He was dressed entirely in white clothes.  A sabhã of munis, 
as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
53.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “The characteristics of moh as  described 
in the shãstras are as follows:  When moh pervades a person’s heart, 
he  simply  cannot  perceive  his  own avgun.    Therefore,  for  a  person 
not to perceive his own avgun is the very definition of delusion. 
 
53.3
 “Moreover, everyone has extreme pride of the wisdom that they 
possess, but they do not think, ‘I do not even know anything about my 
own jeev.  Is the jeev within this body black, or is it white?  Is it long, or 

GADHADÃ II 
- 558 - 
is it short?’  They  know  nothing  about  their  own jeev,  yet  they  find 
avgun in  the  great sant or  in Bhagvãn.    They  feel, ‘Although He is a 
great sant or Bhagvãn, this much He is not doing properly’.    Though 
they  find avgun in  this  way,  little  do  the  fools  realise  that Bhagvãn 
sees  all  the jeevs and ishvars who  dwell  in  the  countless  millions  of 
brahmãnds as  clearly  as  He  sees  a  drop  of  water  in  His  palm.    He  is 
also  the  supporter  of  countless  millions  of brahmãnds;  He  is  the 
husband  of  Lakshmi;  and  He  is  the  creator,  sustainer,  and  destroyer 
of  countless  millions  of brahmãnds.    Even Shesh, Shãrada, Brahmã, 
and other devs are unable to comprehend the extent of His greatness.  
In  fact,  even  the  Veds  describe  His  glory  as ‘neti neti’ implying that 
the glory of Bhagvãn is unparalleled. 
 
53.4
 “Therefore,  a  person  who  perceives avgun either   in Bhagvãn’s 
charitras or  in  His  understanding  should  be  known  to  be  a vimukh 
and  a  sinner.    In  fact,  he  should  be  considered  to  be  the  king  of  all 
fools.  The understanding of Bhagvãn and His bhaktas is beyond this 
world.    Then,  how can  a  person  who  believes  his self  to  be  the body 
possibly comprehend it? 
 
53.5
 “So, it is simply out of foolishness that a person perceives flaws in 
Bhagvãn and His bhaktas and therefore falls from the path of 
Bhagvãn; but Bhagvãn’s true bhakta, the sat-purush, continues to act 
in a alokik way.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 53 || 186 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 54 
Satsang Is The Greatest Spiritual Activity 
 
54.1 
In  the Samvat year  1880,  in  the  afternoon  on Jyeshth sud 7  [3
rd
 June 
1824],  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  arrived  at  Lakshmi-Vãdi 
on  horseback from Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    After  riding 
the horse for quite some time, He sat down on a square platform.  He 

GADHADÃ II 
- 559 - 
was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    He  had  also  tied  a  black-
bordered  cloth  around  His  head.    In  addition  to  this,  a  garland of 
mogrã flowers   was   hanging   from   His   neck,   and   His pãgh was 
decorated  with  a  tassel  of  flowers.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
54.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked the munis, “In the twelfth chapter of the 
eleventh skandh of  Shreemad  Bhãgvat, Shree Krishna Bhagvãn has 
said  to  Uddhav, ‘I am not as pleased by ashtãng-yog,  sãnkhya,  tyãg, 
vrats, yagna, tap, and yãtrã, as I am pleased by satsang’.  This is what 
Bhagvãn has said.  This implies that of all spiritual activities, satsang 
is  the  greatest.    However,  what  are  the  characteristics  of  a  person 
who regards satsang as the greatest spiritual activity?” 
 
54.3 
The munis answered  according  to  their  understanding,  but  none 
could give a precise answer. 
 
54.4 
So, Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A person who regards satsang as  the 
greatest  spiritual  activity  is  deeply  attached  only  to  the sant of 
Bhagvãn.  For example, if a king who is childless receives a son in old 
age,  then  even  if  that  son  swears  at  the  king  or  misbehaves,  like  by 
pulling his moustache, the king would not find faults in him.  Even if 
the  son  hits  another  child  or  causes  problems  in  the  village,  still  the 
king  would  never  attribute  faults  to  his  child.    This  is  because  the 
king  is  profoundly  attached  to  his  son.    Likewise, only  a  person  who 
develops  such  deep  attachment  for  the bhaktas of Bhagvãn has 
realised satsang to  be  the  most kalyãn-kãri of  all  spiritual  activities.  
This fact has been described in the Shreemad Bhãgvat: 
 
yasyãtmã-buddhiha kunape tri-dhãtuke svadheeha kalatradishu bhauma iyadheeha 
yat-teertha-buddhiha salile na karhichij-janeshva-bhigneshu sa eva gokharaha 
If a person regards the body to be his own self; regards his wife and children to 
be his own; regards the murtis of Bhagvãn made from earth to be respected; 
and regards water to be sacred like a place of pilgrimage, but does not regard 
the enlightened bhakta of Bhagvãn in this way, then he is the most disgraceful 
of all animals, a wild donkey. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 560 - 
“This verse has stated the fact appropriately.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 54 || 185 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 55 
Perform The Nine Types Of Bhakti After Becoming Brahm-Rup 
A Goldsmith’s Workshop 
 
55.1 
In  the Samvat year  1880,  on Jyeshth sud 11  [7
th
 June  1824],  Swãmi 
Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large decorate bedstead 
on  the  veranda  outside  the  east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s 
darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  had  tied  a  golden-bordered,  white moliyu 
from Navãnagar around His head.  He was wearing a white khes and 
had covered Himself with a white pachhedi.  A sabhã of munis, as well 
as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered  before  Him.    Some 
of  the munis were  singing kirtans to  the  accompaniment  of  a jhãnjh 
and mrudang. 
 
55.2 
After the munis had finished singing the kirtans, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, 
“Just as a person possesses some sort of strength today, he must also 
have  had  some  trace  of  it  before  joining satsang.    Therefore,  today  I 
would like all of you to describe whatever type of strength you have.  
To begin, I shall describe the type of strength I have, so please listen. 
 
55.3 
“Even when I was a child, I very much enjoyed going to mandirs for 
darshan,  listening  to kathãs,  keeping  the  company  of sãdhus,  and 
going on yãtrã.  Then, when I left my home, I did not even like to keep 
clothes.  In fact, I like to stay only in the forest, and I was not the least 
bit  afraid.    Even  when  I  came  across  large  snakes,  lions,  elephants, 
and  countless  other  types  of animals in  the  forest, there  was  not  the 
slightest  fear  of  dying  in  my  heart.    In  this  way,  I  always  remained 
fearless in the dense forest.  Thereafter, after travelling to holy places 
of pilgrimage, I met Rãmãnand Swãmi.  Only after Rãmãnand Swãmi 
passed away did I begin to keep a little fear; and that was for the sake 
of satsang. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 561 - 
55.4
 “However, the following thought is constantly in my mind:  When a 
person  is  laid  down  on  his  death-bed  with  death  waiting,  everyone 
loses their self-interest in that person.  The mind of the person who is 
dying  also  becomes  dejected  from  worldly  life.    In  the  same  way,  I 
also  constantly  feel  as  if  death  is  waiting  at  this  moment  for  me,  as 
well as for others.  In fact, I constantly regard each and every worldly 
object   to   be   perishable   and   worthless.      Never   do I   make   any 
distinctions such as, ‘This is a nice object, and this is a bad object’.  All 
worldly   objects   appear   the   same   to   me.      For   example,   when 
considering  the  hairs  of  the  armpit,  which  can  be  considered  good 
and  which  bad?    Good  or  bad,  they  are  all  the  same.    Similarly,  all 
worldly objects appear the same to me. 
 
55.5 
“If I do compliment or criticise something, it is only to please the 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn.  When I say things such as, ‘This is delicious food’, 
or ‘These are nice clothes’,  or ‘This is beautiful jewellery’,  or ‘This is a 
pleasant house’, or ‘This is a fine horse’, or ‘This is a beautiful flower’, it 
is only to please that particular bhakta.  In fact, all of my activities are 
for  the  sake  of  the bhaktas of Bhagvãn;  there  is  not  a  single  activity 
which I perform for my own personal enjoyment.” 
 
55.6 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “The mind of an ekãntik bhakta of Bhagvãn 
thinks of only the svarup of Bhagvãn; his mouth sings only the praises 
of Bhagvãn;  his  hands  engage  only  in  the sevã of Bhagvãn and  His 
bhaktas;  and  his  ears  listen  only  to  the  praises  of Bhagvãn.    In  this 
way, I am able to perform all my activities only after realising them to 
be  a  form  of bhakti to Bhagvãn.    Besides  the bhakti of Bhagvãn,  my 
mind is indifferent to everything else.  For example, if the only son of 
a king dies when the king reaches the age of sixty or seventy, the king 
would   become   disinterested   in   all   things.      In   the   same   way,   I 
constantly  remain  disinterested  while  eating,  drinking,  mounting  a 
horse, and even when I am pleased or displeased. 
 
55.7 
“In addition, a thought also remains within my heart that I am the 
ãtmã, distinct from the body; I am not like this body.  Also, my mind 

GADHADÃ II 
- 562 - 
is always cautious, for fear that a portion of mãyã in the form of rajo-
gun and tamo-gun will  infiltrate  my ãtmã!    In  fact,  I  am  constantly 
attentive of that. 
 
55.8 
“Now, consider the following analogy of a goldsmith’s workshop:  If a 
person  takes  some  pure,  twenty-four-carat gold to the goldsmith’s 
workshop,   but   takes   his   eyes   off   of it   for   even   a   moment,   the 
goldsmith  will  extract  some  of  the  gold  and  alloy  some  silver  in  its 
place.  Similarly, consider the goldsmith’s workshop to be the heart 
and  the  goldsmith  to  be mãyã.    While  the  goldsmith  is  sitting  within 
his  workshop  (heart),  he  is  continuously  hammering  away  with  his 
hammer  of  desires.    Even  his  wife  and  children  secretly  steal  some 
gold  if  they  can  get  their  hands  on  it.    Consider  the indriyas and 
antah-karans to  be  the  wife  and children  of  the  goldsmith  (mãyã);  it 
is  they  who add  silver  (three gun,  attachment  to  the panch-vishays, 
the belief that he is body, and that he has kãm, krodh, and lobh) into 
the  gold  (chaitanya).    They  also  extract  some  gold  (gun,  such  as 
dharma, bhakti, gnãn, and vairãgya). 
 
55.9 “
When  some  gold  is  extracted  and  sliver  is  mixed  in  its  place,  the 
original  gold  diminishes  in  purity  to  become  eighteen-carat  gold.    It 
can be purified again only after melting.  Therefore, the silver of rajo-
gun and tamo-gun,  which  has  been  mixed  into  the jeev, should  be 
filtered  out.    Then,  the  pure ãtmã (gold)  will  remain,  and  no  other 
impurities of mãyã will be left.  This is the thought in which I remain 
engrossed, day and night. 
 
55.10
 “I have therefore described my strength to you.  Now, in the same 
way, please describe your strengths to me.” 
 
55.11 
Then,   the sãdhus said,  “Mahãrãj,  in  no  way  can  there  be  any 
impurities  of mãyã in  you,  as  you  are divya.    The  talk  you  have  just 
delivered also describes our strength; and the thought that you have 
mentioned is actually what all of us should develop in our lives.” 

GADHADÃ II 
- 563 - 
55.12
 Having delivered this talk, Shreeji Mahãrãj bid “Jay Sachidãnand” to 
all and returned to His residence. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 55 || 188 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 56 
Love Only For Bhagvãn 
 
56.1 
In  the Samvat year  1880,  on Ashãdh sud 5  [1
st
 July  1824],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress  with  a  large, 
cylindrical  pillow  that  had  been  placed  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on 
the  veranda  outside  the  east-facing  rooms  of  Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr 
in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of 
munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before Him in a sabhã.  Some of the sãdhus were singing kirtans to the 
accompaniment of a dukad and sarodã. 
 
56.2 
After the singing had finished, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Upon hearing 
these kirtans,  my ãtmã delved  into  deep  thought,  from  which  I  have 
concluded  that  deep  love  for Bhagvãn is  a  great  thing.    Then,  I 
remembered  Gopãlãnand  Swãmi  and  all  the bhaktas who  have  deep 
love for Bhagvãn; and I could see their love towards Bhagvãn in all of 
their antah-karans and jeevs.  Then, I examined my own ãtmã, and it 
appeared  to  me  that  others  do  not  seem  to  have  as  much  love  for 
Bhagvãn as  I  do.    After  all,  if  they  were  to  encounter  unpleasant 
circumstances, then even though they are great, their mind would at 
least  be  slightly  affected.    Therefore,  I  felt  that  ultimately  their 
foundation  appears  to  be  weak.    In  fact,  if  they  were  to  encounter 
extremely  unpleasant  circumstances,  their  love  for Bhagvãn would 
not remain stable at all. 
 
56.3 
“So, after examining everyone, it seems to me that my position is 
better;  regardless  of  the  extent  of  unpleasant  circumstances  that  I 
may encounter, in no way will my antah-karans ever be affected.  If a 

GADHADÃ II 
- 564 - 
person’s love for Bhagvãn is true, he never develops love for anything 
other than Bhagvãn.  In fact, the essence of all shãstras is simply this:  
Bhagvãn is  the  sole  source  of  eternal  bliss  and  the  supreme  essence 
of  everything.    Excluding Bhagvãn,  all  other  objects  are  absolutely 
worthless and totally insignificant. 
 
56.4
 “If a person does have as much love for other objects as he does for 
Bhagvãn,  then  his  foundation  is  indeed  very  weak.    Consider  the 
analogy of a piece of lightly dyed cloth.  It may look very nice initially, 
but  if  water  happens  to  fall  on  it,  and  it  is  then  put  out  to  dry  in  the 
sun,  then  it  becomes  useless.    It  would  become  so  useless  that  it 
would  not  even  remain  like  a  white  piece  of cloth.   In  the same  way, 
when a  person  who  has  affection  for  the panch-vishays encounters 
evil company, a person can never be certain about him. 
 
56.5
 “Therefore, to please Bhagvãn, a bhakta should totally discard the 
panch-vishays.  He should also abandon any affection for objects 
which may obstruct his love for Bhagvãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 56 || 189 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 57 
A ‘Cat-Like’ Bhakta 
 
57.1 
In  the Samvat year  1881,  during  the  even ãrti on Ashãdh sud 6  [2
nd
 
July  1824],  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a 
decorated  bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  east-facing  rooms  of 
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    A  few  torches  had  been  lit.  
Tassels made  of  flowers were  hanging  from  the  white pãgh that had 
been  tied  around  His  head.    He  was  wearing  a  white khes and  had 
covered Himself with a white chãdar.  A sabhã of paramhans, as well 
as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered  before  Him  in  a 
sabhã.        Some    of    the sãdhus were    singing kirtans to    the 
accompaniment of a dukad and sarodã. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 565 - 
57.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Please listen, I wish to speak to all of you.  
When  you  were  singing kirtans,  and  as  I  was  listening  to  them,  a 
thought  occurred  to  me,  which  I  shall  now  share  with  you.    If  a 
person  wants  to  love Bhagvãn,  he  should  love  Him  while  believing 
himself to be the pure ãtmã.  What is that ãtmã like?  Well, within it 
there are no obstructions either of Mãyã or the entities evolved from 
Mãyã (the  three gun,  the  body,  the indriyas,  and  the antah-karans).  
Whatever  obstructions seem  to  be  in  the ãtmã are due  to  ignorance.  
However,  no  obstructions  of  any  form  remain  in  a  person  who  has 
totally  dispelled  them  through gnãn and vairãgya.    However,  to 
behave as the ãtmã does not mean to believe himself to be brahm and 
act waywardly.  In actual fact, the purpose of behaving as the ãtmã is 
to  realise, ‘I am the ãtmã, and there are obstructions of Mãyã within 
me.    If  that  is  so,  how  can  there  be  even  the  slightest  trace  of  Mãyã  in 
Paramãtmã  Nãrãyan  Vãsudev, who is beyond the ãtmã?’  For  this 
reason,  the  quality  of ãtmã-nishthã should  be  firmly  developed  so 
that a person does not perceive any fault in Bhagvãn. 
 
57.3 
“Then, keeping his thought in the midst of the light of the ãtmã,  he 
should  destroy  anything that  tries  to  disturb  him  from  behaving  as 
the ãtmã.    For  example,  when  a  lizard  comes  near  the  light  of  an  oil 
lamp,  it  kills  any  insect  that  comes  near  the  light.    In  the  same  way, 
the   thought   that   rests   within   the   light   of   the ãtmã destroys 
everything apart from the ãtmã. 
 
57.4 
“Furthermore,  if  a  person  truly  loves Bhagvãn,   he   would   never 
develop love for anything else.  If there is an object that appears to be 
dearer to him than Bhagvãn, he would completely discard it.  That is 
true tyãg.  He would discard that object irrespective of whether it is a 
significant  object  or  an  insignificant  object – only  that  is  called tyãg.  
On  the  other  hand,  if  a  person  can  outwardly  give  up  many  other 
things    but    cannot    discard    an    object    that    obstructs    him    in 
worshipping Bhagvãn, his tyãg is useless. 
 

GADHADÃ II 
- 566 - 
57.5 
“Also, do not think that only appealing objects obstruct a person’s 
worship  of Bhagvãn and  insignificant  objects  do  not.    After  all,  the 
very  nature  of  the jeev is  such  that  some  people  prefer  sweet  items, 
some  prefer  salty  items,  some  prefer  sour  items,  and  some  prefer 
bitter  items.    Therefore,  it  is  the  petty  mentality  of  the jeev that  it 
keeps  even  the  most  insignificant  objects  dearer  to  it  than Bhagvãn.  
However, when a person considers the greatness of Bhagvãn, no such 
object can compare to even a millionth of a fraction of His greatness. 
 
57.6 
“If  a  person  has  developed  love  for Bhagvãn having  thoroughly 
realised Bhagvãn in this way, he would not develop love towards any 
worldly  object,  such  as  the body,  and  the brahmãnd.    Instead,  all 
worldly  objects  would  become  insignificant  to  him.    After  all,  it  was 
when  Chitraketu  Rãjã  thoroughly  realised  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn 
that  he  abandoned  his  ten  million  wives.    He  even  abandoned  his 
empire,  which  spanned  across  the  entire  country.    He  ultimately 
realised, ‘Of what value is the pleasure of ten million women before the 
bliss  of  Bhagvãn?    Of  what  value  are  the  pleasures  of  an  empire 
spanning the entire country?  Of what value are the pleasures of the lok 
of Indra and the lok of Brahmã?’ 
 
57.7 
“In contrast, a person who has love for some objects other than such 
a  great Bhagvãn possesses  a  very  petty  mentality.    Just  as  a  dog 
deprives pleasure from taking a dry bone to some isolated place and 
then  licking  it,  in  the  same  way,  a  foolish  person  believes  that  there 
are   pleasures  in   such  miseries,   and   therefore  develops   love  for 
worthless  objects.    If  a bhakta of Bhagvãn does  have  more  love  for 
some  object  than  he  has  for Bhagvãn, then he is nothing but a ‘cat-
like’ (deceitful) bhakta.  On the other hand, a true bhakta of Bhagvãn 
would definitely not hold anything dearer to him than Bhagvãn.” 
 
57.8 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “A bhakta of Bhagvãn who possesses gnãn, 
vairãgya, bhakti, and dharma realises, ‘A person who is brave and who 
walks  boldly  towards  his  enemy  at  the  time  of  battle  is  indeed  truly 

GADHADÃ II 
- 567 - 
brave.    Conversely,  it  is  pointless  when  a  person  who  is  brave  is  not 
utilised  in  battle,  just  like  wealth  that  is  not  spent.    Similarly,  since  I 
have attained Bhagvãn, if I do not talk about kalyãn to those who keep 
my company, then of what use is my gnãn?’  Bearing  this  in  mind,  he 
would  not  have  any  cowardice  in  talking  about Bhagvãn – even  if 
some opposition were to arise regarding his preaching.” 
 
57.9 
Having  said this,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  requested  the  singing  of  three 
verses written by Tulsidãs: ‘Jãki Lagan Rãmso Nahi...’, ‘Ehi Kahyo Sunu 
Ved Chahu...’, and ‘Jãku Priya Na Rãm Vaidehi...’. 
 
57.10 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then added, “We should live according to the words 
mentioned   in   these   verses.      While   doing   so,   if   some   deficiency 
remains, and if a person were to die at that time, he will still not enter 
the cycle of births and deaths, nor will he become a ghost.  In fact, at 
the very worst, he will join the ranks of Indra or Brahma; his fate will 
not  be  any  worse  than  that.    Therefore,  a  person  should  fearlessly 
engage in the worship of Bhagvãn.” 
 
57.11 
At that point, Mulji Brahm-Chãri came to call Shreeji Mahãrãj for His 
meals, and they both left the sabhã together. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 57 || 190 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 58 
The Flourishing Of A Sampradãy 
 
58.1 
In  the Samvat year  1881,  on Shrãvan sud 4  [29
th
 July  1824],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress  with  a  large, 
cylindrical  pillow that  had  been  placed  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on 
the  veranda  outside  the  east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr 
in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of 
munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before Him. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 568 - 
58.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “How do the sampradãys of  the  great 
ãchãryas flourish for a long period of time?” 
 
58.3 
Muktãnand  Swãmi  answered,  “Firstly,  by  the shãstras of   the 
sampradãy;  secondly,  by  following  the dharma of a person’s varna 
and ãshram as  prescribed  in  the shãstras;  and  thirdly,  by  total  belief 
in  a  person’s ishta-dev.    A sampradãy flourishes  by  these  three 
factors.” 
 
58.4 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then asked the same question to Brahmãnand Swãmi 
and Nityãnand Swãmi.  They also gave the same reply. 
 
58.5 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Here, allow me to answer the question.  
A sampradãy flourishes  by  knowing  the  following:    The  purpose  for 
which  the ishta-dev of  the sampradãy took  birth  on  earth;  and  after 
taking birth, the various charitras He performed, as well as the ways 
in which He behaved.  Through His behaviour, dharma as well as the 
greatness  of  that ishta-dev is  naturally  revealed.    In  this  way,  a 
sampradãy is advanced by the shãstras which narrate the charitras of 
its ishta-dev from His birth up until His passing away.  Regardless of 
whether those shãstras are in Sanskrit or in a different language, only 
those shãstras will advance the sampradãy, not others. 
 
58.6 
“For example, those who worship Rãm Bhagvãn will be inspired only 
by  the  Vãlmiki  Rãmãyan  ;  and  those  who  worship Shree Krishna 
Bhagvãn will  be  inspired  only  by  the  tenth  and  eleventh skandhs of 
the Shreemad Bhãgvat.  The Veds will not inspire those who worship 
Rãm Bhagvãn or Shree Krishna Bhagvãn.  Ultimately, only the shãstras 
of a person’s own sampradãy will advance the sampradãy.” 
 
58.7 
Having  said  this,  “Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  commanded  Muktãnand 
Swãmi:  “You too should continuously preach and write shãstras 
related to your sampradãy and your ishta-dev for the rest of your life.  
This is my ãgnã to you for as long as you live.” 

GADHADÃ II 
- 569 - 
58.8 
With great respect for these words of Shreeji Mahãrãj, Muktãnand 
Swãmi promised to devoutly abide by them.  Then, folding his hands, 
he bowed before Shreeji Mahãrãj. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 58 || 191 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 59 
Bhagvãn And Sant Are Kalyãn-Kãri 
 
59.1 
In the Samvat year 1881, on Shrãvan sud 12 [6
th
 August 1824], Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on 
the  veranda  outside  the mandir of Shree Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in  Dãdã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from various places, 
had gathered before Him. 
 
59.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “In the four Veds, the Purãns, and the 
historical shãstras, there is one central principle, and that is that only 
Bhagvãn and  His sant can  grant kalyãn.    In  fact, Bhagvãn’s sant is 
greater  that  even Shiv, Brahmã,  and  the  other devs.    So,  when  a 
person attains Bhagvãn or His sant, apart from this, there is no other 
kalyãn for that jeev; this itself is ultimate kalyãn. 
 
59.3 
“Furthermore, only those who have accumulated a great number of 
rewards  from  performing  good  deeds  receive  the  opportunity  to 
serve Bhagvãn’s sant,  but  those  who  have  few  merits  do  not.    So,  a 
person should develop love for Bhagvãn’s sant just as he has love for 
his  wife,  son,  parents,  or  brother.    Then,  due  to  this  love,  the jeev 
becomes absolutely fulfilled. 
 
59.4 
“Moreover, even if a person’s wife, son, or other family members are 
unworthy;  and  even  if  they  are  dishonest  and  evil,  in  no  way  would 
he perceive avgun in them.  Conversely, even if the bhakta of Bhagvãn 

GADHADÃ II 
- 570 - 
possesses  every  noble  quality,  if  he  were  to  utter  even  a  few  harsh 
words, then a person would hold a grudge against him for as long as 
he  lives.    If  a  person  has  such  an  attitude,  then  in  no  way  can  he  be 
said  to  have  as  much  love  for  the bhaktas of Bhagvãn as  he  does  for 
his relatives.  As a result, he would not attain kalyãn. 
 
59.5 
“Furthermore, the greatness of the sant is  as  much  as  I  mentioned 
earlier.    Yet,  even  after  attaining Bhagvãn and  His sant,  some  people 
still  have  the  doubt, ‘Will I attain kalyãn or not?’  What  can  be  the 
reason  for  this?    Well,  in  his  past  lives,  that  person  had  not  attained 
Bhagvãn or His sant, and nor had he served them.  Therefore, this is a 
new  experience  for him, which  will  show  rewards in  his  subsequent 
lives.    On  the  other  hand,  if  a  person  had  attained Bhagvãn and  His 
sant and  had  served  them  in  his  past  lives,  then  in  this  life,  his  love 
for  the bhaktas of Bhagvãn would  never  diminish;  nor  would  he 
waver in his nishchay.  Even if his disturbing thoughts related to kãm, 
krodh, or lobh persisted, his nishchay in Bhagvãn would not dissolve.  
Then,  what  can  be  said  about  his nishchay not  faltering  due  to  some 
other person’s influence?  In fact, even if his own mind were to try to 
sway  him  from  his nishchay,  he  would  still  not  be  swayed.    Such  a 
person’s determination can be said to be like that of Nãth Bhakta, 
Vishnudãs,  Himrãj  Shah  and  Bhãlchandra  Sheth;  and  Kashidãs  and 
Dãmodar also had this determination.  When a person possesses such 
determination, it should be known that this person has been a bhakta 
of Bhagvãn in a past life.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 59 || 192 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 60 
Overcoming Difficulties When Performing The Bhakti Of 
Bhagvãn 
 
60.1 
In the Samvat year 1881, on Shrãvan vad 4 [13
th
 August 1824], Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  in 

GADHADÃ II 
- 571 - 
the eastern veranda outside the west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s 
darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  wearing  a  white khes and  had  tied  a 
white pãgh around  His  head.    He  had  also  covered  Himself  with  a 
thin, white cloth.  A sabhã of paramhans, as well as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
60.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj requested, “Please begin a question-answer 
discussion.” 
 
60.3 
Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, life is full of difficulties.  
Amidst  all  these  difficulties,  what  understanding  should  a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn develop in order to remain happy at heart?” 
 
60.4 
Shreeji Mahãrãj began, “To answer that, I shall tell you about my own 
experience.”  He then explained, “By keeping the following three 
forms   of   awareness,   I   am   not   obstructed   by   any   disturbances:  
constant awareness of the ãtmã, which is distinct from the body; the 
awareness  of  the  perishable  nature  of  all  worldly objects;  and  the 
awareness  of Bhagvãn’s greatness.    By  keeping  these  three  forms  of 
awareness, no difficulties obstruct me in any way. 
 
60.5 
“However, if a person does encounter some difficulties, then due to 
the nature of the chitt, it may appear that there is some disturbance.  
However,  the  effect  of  that  disturbance  does  not  penetrate  into  the 
chaitanya.    This  can  be  realised  by  the  fact  that  a  person  never 
experiences  disturbances  that  are  occurring  externally  when  he  is 
dreaming.    On  the  other  hand,  if  a  disturbance  has  penetrated  into 
the chaitanya,  it  is  experienced  in  all  three  mental  states  (jãgrat, 
svapna,  and sushupti).    Therefore,  because  I  do  not  experience  any 
disturbances  in  my  dreams,  it  can  be  assumed  that  no  disturbances 
have affected my chaitanya in any way. 
 
60.6 
“Having said this, if a bhakta of Bhagvãn encounters  some  sort  of 
distressing hardship, it is not as if I do not realise it;  I very much do 

GADHADÃ II 
- 572 - 
feel it in my heart.  Only a vimukh like Raghunãth-Dãs would not feel 
it.    When  Rãmãnand Swãmi  left  his  body,  all  the satsangis began  to 
cry,  but  Raghunãth-Dãs  was  not  at  all  upset.    Instead,  he  wandered 
around, laughing and talking to others.  Therefore, only an outcast or 
a vimukh would  not  feel  hurt  when  a bhakta of Bhagvãn encounters 
some sort  of  misery;  but  a bhakta of Bhagvãn would  definitely 
become distressed by the suffering of other bhaktas.” 
 
60.7 
Continuing, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “The shãstras state  that  if  a bhakta 
of Bhagvãn is  being  killed  or  harassed  by  someone,  then  a  person 
who  stands  in  defence  of  that bhakta of Bhagvãn – and  in  doing  so 
dies  or  becomes  wounded  himself – is  totally  freed  from  the  five 
great  sins.    Such  is  the  glory  of  defending  a bhakta of Bhagvãn.  
However, if a person is hurt by the words of the bhaktas of Bhagvãn – 
as if he has  been shot in  the  heart  by some  arrows – and if  a  grudge 
develops from that hatred to such an extent that it is not resolved as 
long as he lives, then such a person is like an outcast.  Even if such a 
person possesses qualities such as dharma and tyãg, or performs tap, 
it  is  all  worthless.    In  fact,  even  if  he  performs  a  million  other 
activities, his jeev will not attain kalyãn. 
 
60.8 
“In society, if a woman has equal love for her husband as she does for 
another  man,  then  she  is  looked upon  as  being  immoral – like  a 
prostitute.  Similarly, if a person in this world believes, ‘As far as I am 
concerned, all sãdhus are equal.  Who is good and who is bad?’,  then 
even if he is considered to be a satsangi, he should be known to be a 
vimukh.   In  addition,  in  case  a  person  feels, ‘If  I  say  something 
inappropriate, my own friends will criticise me,’ he listens as someone 
speaks  unkindly  of  a bhakta of Bhagvãn in  order  to  preserve  his 
respect.    He  should  also  be  known  to  be  a vimukh,  even  though  he 
may be considered to be a satsangi. 
 
60.9 
“Therefore,  a  person  should  be  absolutely  loyal  to  a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn – just  as  he  is  loyal  to  his  relatives  and  his  mother  and 
father.    If  ever  some  sort  of  difficulty  does  happen  to  arise  with  a 

GADHADÃ II 
- 573 - 
bhakta of Bhagvãn, only a person who does not develop a grudge, but 
settles  the  difference  and  reunites  with  that bhakta – like  a  line 
drawn in water – can be called a true bhakta of Bhagvãn.” 
 
60.10 
Having  said  this,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  finally  added,  “I  am  very 
compassionate – like Dattãtrey, Jadbharat, Nãrad, and Shukji.  In fact, 
once while I was travelling in the east, I came across a group of tyãgis.  
They  ordered me:   ‘Go and pick some green spinach’.   I  replied, ‘I will 
not pick it, because it too contains a jeev’.   Hearing  this,  one  of  them 
drew  a  sword  and  threatened  me.    Nevertheless,  I  did  not  pick  the 
spinach.  This is the extent of my compassionate nature.  However, if 
a  person  looks  angrily  at  a bhakta of Bhagvãn,  then  even  if  that 
person is  a  relative  of mine, I  feel  like  tearing  his eyes  out;  and  if he 
should hurt a bhakta of Bhagvãn with his hands, I feel like cutting his 
hands off.  Such is the hatred I experience; and in those cases, I do not 
show  any  compassion.    Only  a  person  who  has  such  loyalty  for  a 
bhakta of Bhagvãn can be called a complete bhakta of Bhagvãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 60 || 193 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 61 
Niyams, Nishchay In Bhagvãn, And Loyalty 
 
61.1 
In the Samvat year 1881, on Shrãvan vad 7 [17
th
 August 1825], Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  in 
the eastern veranda outside the west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s 
darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  had  tied  a  golden-bordered,  white shelu 
around  His  head  and  had  covered  Himself  with  another  white shelu.  
He was also wearing a white khes and a garland of mogrã flowers.  A 
sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had 
gathered before Him. 
 
61.2 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “A  person  who  possesses  three 
characteristics  can  be  called  a  firm satsangi.    What  are  these  three 

GADHADÃ II 
- 574 - 
characteristics?    The  first  is  to  strictly  follow  the niyams prescribed 
by  his ishta-dev – to  such  an  extent  that  he  would  never abandon 
those niyams even  at  the  cost  of  his  life.    The  second  is  to  have 
extremely firm nishchay in Bhagvãn, so much so that he would never 
diverge  from  it  even  if  others  or  his  own  mind  was  to  raise  doubts.  
The third is to be loyal to those Vaishnav bhaktas who worship their 
ishta-dev – just as parents are loyal to their children, a son is loyal to 
his   father,   and   a   wife  is   loyal   to   her   husband.      A   person   who 
possesses these three characteristics completely can be called a firm 
satsangi.” 
 
61.3 
Then continuing, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “When someone comes and 
sits at the front of a sabhã of bhaktas, others think, ‘This person must 
be a great satsangi’.    However,  the  test  of  a  great satsangi is  as 
follows:    If  he  is  a grahastha,  he  would  surrender  everything  he  has 
for Bhagvãn and His bhaktas; and if required to do so, he would even 
give  his  life  for satsang;  and  the  moment  his ishta-dev gives  an ãgnã 
for him  to  become  a paramhans,  he  would  immediately  become  a 
paramhans.    If  a bhakta of Bhagvãn possesses  these  characteristics, 
then whether he sits at the front of a sabhã of bhaktas, or at the back, 
he should be considered to be great amongst all bhaktas.  Moreover, a 
tyãgi who remains unaffected and continues to firmly follow all of his 
niyams,  despite  encountering  wealth  and  women  in  his  travels  to 
other regions, is considered to be great amongst all tyãgis. 
 
61.4 
“If a person with rajo-gun,  who  is  considered  to  be  reputable  in 
society,  comes  to  a sabhã,  then  he  should  be  respected  accordingly 
and given a seat at the very front of the sabhã.  Such etiquette should 
be observed by those possessing gnãn, as well as by tyãgis.  If they do 
not, then the consequences can be harmful.  Consider the example of 
when Parikshit Rãjã went to the rushi’s ãshram.  The rushi happened 
to  be  in samãdhi and  so  the  king  was  not  honoured.    As  a  result,  the 
king  became  angry  and  threw  a  dead  snake  around  the rushi’s neck.  
Then,  the rushi’s son cursed the king, leading to the king’s death 
seven days later. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 575 - 
61.5 
“There is also the example of when Daksh prajãpati visited Brahma’s 
sabhã.    There,  Shivji  neither  stood  up  for  Daksh,  nor  welcomed  him 
verbally;  therefore  upsetting  Daksh.   He  then cancelled Shivji’s share 
in  the yagna he  performed.    Then, Nandishvar and  Bhrugu  Rushi 
cursed each other; because of that sin, Sati burnt to death in Daksh’s 
sacrifice.  This prompted Virbhadra to cut off Daksh’s head and offer 
it in the fire, which resulted in Daksh receiving the head of a goat. 
 
61.6 
“Therefore, all of you grahasthas and tyãgis should  abide  by  the 
following:  Those who are considered to be respectable in society and 
worldly  affairs  should  in  no  way  be  insulted  in  a sabhã.    If  they  are 
dishonoured,    it    will    definitely    lead    to    problems    and    create 
obstructions in worship.  For this reason, all satsangi grahasthas and 
tyãgis should firmly abide by this principle of mine.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 61 || 194 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 62 
Ãtmã-Nishthã, Pati-Vratã, And Sevã 
 
62.1 
In  the Samvat year  1881,  on Mãgshar sud 2  [22
nd
 November  1824], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  north-facing  rooms  of  Dãdã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was wearing a white khes and had 
tied  a  white pãgh around  His  head.   Also,  He  had  covered  Himself 
with  a  white chofãl.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
62.2 
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  summoned  His  nephews,  Ayodhyãprasãdji  and 
Raghuvirji, and said to them, “You may ask me questions.” 
 
62.3 
Then, Ayodhyãprasãdji first asked, “In life, a man may be engrossed 
in  the  entanglements  of  worldly  affairs  all  day  long,  and  during  that 
time,  he  may  well  perform  some  moral  as  well  as  immoral karmas.  

GADHADÃ II 
- 576 - 
Moreover,  he  may  engage  in  worship for  only  half  an  hour  or  so.    Is 
this  enough  to  burn  all of  the  sins  he  has committed  during  the  day, 
or not?  That is my question?” 
 
62.4 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Even if a person has spent the whole day in 
pravrutti,  and  regardless  of  whatever  type  of  activities  he  may  have 
been  involved  in,  when  he  engages  in  the  worship  of Bhagvãn,  if  his 
indriyas, antah-karans,  and jeev all  unite  and  become  engrossed  in 
worship,  then  even  if  he  does  so  for  half  an  hour,  or  even  for  a  few 
minutes, all of his sins will be burnt to ashes.  However, if his indriyas, 
antah-karans,  and jeev do  not  unite  and  engage  in  worship,  then  his 
sins cannot be burned by worshipping for such a short while.  Such a 
person  can  attain kalyãn only  by  the  grace  of Bhagvãn.    This  is  the 
answer to your question.” 
 
62.5 
Next, Raghuvirji asked a question, “Mahãrãj, what must a person do 
for the moksh of the jeev?” 
 
62.6 
Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “If a person seeks kalyãn, he should place 
his  body,  wealth,  home,  family,  and  relations  in  the sevã of Bhagvãn.  
Furthermore, he should avoid any object that may not be of use in the 
sevã of Bhagvãn.    A  person  who  lives  a  life  centred  around Bhagvãn 
joins  the  ranks  of Nãrad and  the Sanakãdik in  the dhãm of Bhagvãn 
and  attains  ultimate moksh after  he  dies,  even  if  he  is  a grahastha.  
This is the answer to your question.” 
 
62.7 
Having answered their questions, Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Since 
the day I began thinking about it, I have noticed that there are three 
strengths  which  lead  to kalyãn and  which  lead  to  extreme  bliss.    Of 
these,  the  first  is  the  strength  of  intense ãtmã-nishthã,  which  is  to 
believe a person’s true self to be the ãtmã and  engage  in  worship  of 
Bhagvãn,  like  Shukji.    The  second  is  like  the  strength  of pati-vratã, 
which is to worship Bhagvãn as if He is his husband, just as the gopis 
did.  The third is the strength of sevã, which is to worship Bhagvãn as 

GADHADÃ II 
- 577 - 
His dãs,  just  like Hanumãnji and  Uddhavji.    Without  these  three 
strengths, there is no way in which the jeev can attain kalyãn.  In fact, 
I, myself have firmly developed all three of these strengths.  Even if a 
person   possesses   one   of   these   strengths   firmly,   he   becomes 
absolutely fulfilled. 
 
62.8 
“I shall now describe the characteristics of these three strengths 
individually.  Firstly, the following are the characteristics of a person 
who has realised the ãtmã.  On one side there is the ãtmã and on the 
other  side  is  the  crowd  of Mãyã – the  body,  the indriyas,  the antah-
karans,  the  three gun,  and  the panch-vishays.   The thought  that  rests 
between the two is full of gnãn.  This thought remains steady, just as 
the  tip  of  a  flame  remains  steady  in  the  absence  of  wind.    It  is  this 
thought  which  prevents  the  body, indriyas,  and antah-karans from 
becoming one with the ãtmã.  In fact, even the thought itself does not 
become one with the ãtmã. 
 
62.9 
“When the jeev attains this thought, its vruttis, which once reached all 
the  way  to  Kãshi,  recede  to  reach  only  as  far  as  Vadtãl.    When  that 
thought is strengthened, the vruttis then recede from Vadtãl to reach 
only as far as Gadhadã.  Then, from reaching as far as Gadhadã, they 
recede  and  come  into  the  vicinity  of  the  body.    From  the  body,  the 
vruttis recede further and rest in the organs of the indriyas.  From the 
organs of the indriyas, the vruttis of the indriyas turn inward towards 
the antah-karans.  Finally, the vruttis of the indriyas and antah-karans 
become  absorbed  in  the ãtmã.    It  is  then  that  the jeev’s kãran body, 
which is full of worldly desires, is said to be destroyed. 
 
62.10 
“Furthermore, when this thought meets with the ãtmã, divine light is 
generated in  the heart  of the  thinker,  and he  understands  himself  as 
being brahm-rup.  In addition, he also has the realisation of Parbrahm 
Nãrãyan,  who  resides  within  that brahm.    A  person  who  has  this 
realisation  feels, ‘I am the ãtmã, and Paramãtmã eternally resides 
within me’.    Such  a  sustained  state  is  the  highest  level  of ãtmã-
nishthã. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 578 - 
 
62.11 
“Secondly, the strength of a person with pati-vratã should be like that 
of the gopis of Vraj.  For example, from the day the gopis touched the 
holy  feet  of Shree Krishna Bhagvãn,  all  the  pleasures  of  this  world 
became  like  poison  to  them.    In  this  way,  if  a pati-vratã wife  sees  a 
man who is as handsome as Indra, or who is like a dev or some king, 
then  she  would  withdraw  her  eyes,  just  as  when  a  person  sees  a 
rotting  dog  or  some  faeces  and  becomes  extremely  disgusted  and 
looks  away.    This  is  the  highest  level  of pati-vratã.    Therefore,  if  a 
person  attaches  his vruttis to Bhagvãn just  as  a pati-vratã wife  does 
with  her  husband,  his  mind  would  never  become  pleased  upon 
seeing anyone else. 
 
62.12 
“Thirdly, a person who has a strength of offering bhakti with sevã 
would  like  the darshan only  of  his ishta-dev;  he  would  like  to  hear 
talks  only  about  Him;  he  would  like  His ishtadev’s nature;  and  he 
would  also  prefer  to  stay  only  with  Him.    However,  even  though  he 
has  such  love,  for  the  sake  of  serving  his ishta-dev and  earning  His 
pleasure,  he  wishes  day  and  night, ‘If my ishta-dev  were  to  command 
me, I would follow that command most happily’.  If his ishta-dev was to 
give a command that would force him to stay far away, he would stay 
there  happily,  but  in  no  way  would  he  be  disheartened.    In  fact,  he 
finds  supreme  bliss  in  following  the  command  itself.    This  is  the 
highest level of sevã.  Today, Gopãlãnand Swãmi and also Muktãnand 
Swãmi have the strength of offering bhakti with sevã. 
 
62.13 
“Among the bhaktas of Bhagvãn who  possess  one  of  these  three 
strengths,  there  are  three  levels – uttam, madhyam, and kanishth.  
Those  who  are  not  found  in  any  one  of  these  categories  can  only  be 
called wretched.  Therefore, it is only proper to die after a person has 
thoroughly developed one of the three strengths; it is not appropriate 
to die if a person has not completely developed any single one of the 
three.  Instead, it would be better if a person lives five days longer to 
dispel  his  misunderstandings  and  strengthen  at  least  one  of  these 
three inclinations, and then die.” 

GADHADÃ II 
- 579 - 
62.14 
Continuing,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  added, “The nature of the jeev is  such 
that  when  a  person  is  a grahastha,  he  would  prefer  to  abandon 
worldly life; but once he has abandoned the world, he has desires for 
the pleasures of worldly life once again.  This is the rebellious nature 
of  the jeev.    Therefore,  a  person  who  is  a  firm bhakta of Bhagvãn 
should worship Bhagvãn after discarding such a rebellious nature as 
well  as  all  of  his  personal  likes  and  dislikes.    Moreover,  it  is  only 
appropriate  to  die  after  eradicating  all  desires  other  than  those  of 
Bhagvãn. 
 
62.15 
“However, if a person does not have intense love for Bhagvãn,  he 
should  strengthen  only ãtmã-nishthã by  thought.    This  is  because  a 
bhakta of Bhagvãn should   either   possess   firm ãtmã-nishthã or 
extremely deep love for Bhagvãn.  If a person is not firm in either one 
of  these  two  strengths,  he  should strictly  abide  by  the niyams of  this 
satsang.  Only then will he be able to remain a satsangi; otherwise he 
will fall from satsang. 
 
62.16 
“When a bhakta of Bhagvãn experiences  difficulties  of  any kind,  it 
should be known that the source of those miseries is not Kãl, karma, 
or Mãyã.  In actual fact, it is Bhagvãn Himself who inspires difficulties 
to fall upon His bhaktas in order to test their patience.  Then, just as a 
man hides behind a curtain and watches, Bhagvãn hides in the heart 
of His bhakta and from there He observes the bhakta’s patience.  Also 
who  are Kãl, karma,  and Mãyã that  they  could  harm  a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn?    So,  realising  it  to  be Bhagvãn’s wish,  a bhakta of Bhagvãn 
should remain cheerful.” 
 
62.17 
Upon hearing this, Muktãnand Swãmi asked a question:  “Mahãrãj, 
the  talk  in  which  you  have  just  described  the  three  strengths is  very 
subtle and difficult to put into practice.  Only a few can understand it 
and  only  a  few  can  actually  live  by  it;  not  everyone  can  do  so.  
However,  there  are hundreds of  thousands  of  people  in satsang,  and 
it  would  be  difficult  for  all  of  them  to  understand  this  principle.    So, 
how can they progress?” 

GADHADÃ II 
- 580 - 
62.18 
Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “If a person behaves as a dãs of the dãs of 
a bhakta who  possesses  one  of  these  three  strengths,  and  if  he  also 
follows  his ãgnã,  then  despite  not  understanding  anything  else,  he 
would certainly become a pãrshad of Bhagvãn after this very life, and 
would therefore become fulfilled. 
 
62.19 
“In this world, the glory of Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas is  indeed  very 
great.    After  all,  no  matter  how  sinful  or  insignificant  a  person  may 
be, if he seeks the refuge of Bhagvãn and His bhaktas, that person will 
become absolutely fulfilled.  Such is the greatness of Bhagvãn and His 
bhaktas.    Therefore,  a  person  who  has  received  the  opportunity  to 
serve the bhaktas of Bhagvãn’s should remain fearless.” 
 
62.20 
Finally, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “I have delivered this talk about the 
three strengths  mainly  for  the  sake  of  Muktãnand  Swãmi  because  I 
have a great deal of love for him.  So, bearing in mind that Muktãnand 
Swãmi  is  suffering  from  an  illness,  I  spoke  today  to  be  sure  that  no 
form of deficiency remains in his understanding.” 
 
62.21 
In  reply,  Muktãnand  Swãmi  said,  “Mahãrãj,  I  also  felt  that  you 
delivered this talk for me.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 62 || 195 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 63 
Gaining Strength After Performing Sevã 
 
63.1 
In  the Samvat year  1881,  on Mãgshar vad 2  [8
th
 December  1824], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   in   His   place   of 
residence in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed 
entirely  in  white  clothes.    Bhajanãnand  Swãmi  was  reading  the 
Shreemad Bhãgvat before Shreeji Mahãrãj, and a sabhã of paramhans, 
as well as haribhaktas from various places, had also gathered before 
Him. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 581 - 
63.2 
Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “The thought which rests between 
the drashtã and   the drashya keeps   the drashtã and drashya 
separated.    In  this,  what  should  be  understood  as  the  consciousness 
of  the jeev and  what  should  be  understood  as  the  consciousness  of 
the antah-karans?” 
 
63.3 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “It seems to me that if a person’s jeev has 
become  extremely  powerful,  then  the vruttis of  his antah-karans are 
in the vruttis of  his jeev.    These vruttis seem  to  be  divided  into  four 
categories,  according  to  the  four  respective  functions  of  the antah-
karans.  Therefore, the awareness in the indriyas and antah-karans is 
that  of  the jeev itself.    Therefore,  the jeev allows  the indriyas and 
antah-karans to apply themselves wherever it is appropriate to do so 
and    restricts    them    from    doing    as    they    please    where    it    is 
inappropriate to do so.  In fact, if a person’s jeev has  become  very 
powerful,  he  would  not  even  have  impure dreams.    On  the  other 
hand, if a person’s jeev is  lacking  in  strength,  then  he  should  follow 
the principle of Sãnkhya and behave only as the ãtmã (drashtã); but, 
a person should not associate with his indriyas and antah-karans.  By 
behaving as the ãtmã in this way, his jeev gains great strength. 
 
63.4 
“However, there is an even greater method than this to gain strength.  
If  a  person  has  love  for Bhagvãn and  His sant,  possesses  intense 
shraddhã in  serving  them,  and  also  engages  in  the  nine  types  of 
bhakti,  then  his jeev will  instantly  gain  strength.    Therefore,  for 
making  the jeev stronger,  there  is  no  method  comparable  to  that  of 
serving Bhagvãn and His bhaktas. 
 
63.5 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “I shall now tell you a personal principle of 
mine.  When I became ill in the year of Samvat 1869, I saw Kailãs and 
Vaikunth,  and  I  also  saw  myself  riding  on Nandishvar and  riding  on 
Garud.  However, I did not find any pleasure in those powers.  Then, I 
began  to  behave  only  as  the ãtmã,  at  which  point  all  disturbances 
decreased.    However,  then  I  thought, ‘Much better than behaving as 

GADHADÃ II 
- 582 - 
the ãtmã is to stay within the company of Bhagvãn and His bhaktas’.  I 
then become afraid, ‘What if by behaving as the ãtmã, I cannot return 
to  this  body  again?’  Therefore,   to   stay   within   the   company   of 
Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas and  to  be  able  to  serve  them in  whichever 
way possible, is indeed the very best spiritual activity.” 
 
63.6 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj explained, “Countless types of mental and 
physical suffering arise during the final moments of a person’s life.  
But, when a person has the darshan of Bhagvãn and His sant, all those 
miseries  are  expelled.    This  is  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn and  His 
bhaktas.    In  actual  fact,  the bhaktas of Bhagvãn are  indeed  nothing 
but  a murti of brahm.    That  is  why  a  person  should  never  perceive 
human traits in them. 
 
63.7 
“In addition, with the bhaktas of Bhagvãn a person should behave in 
the  same  way  as  family  members do  amongst  themselves.    For 
example,  even  if  a  person  lectures  his  own  family  members  out  of 
love, or if they happen to lecture him, grudges still do not develop in 
their hearts.  With bhaktas of Bhagvãn, a person should behave in the 
same way.  On the other hand, if a person does develop a grudge with 
Bhagvãn or His bhaktas, I do not even like to look at him.  In fact, my 
anger  with  such  a  person  never  subsides.    Moreover,  those  in  this 
world who commit the five great sins can still be redeemed someday, 
whereas  a  person  who  spites bhaktas of Bhagvãn can  never  be 
redeemed. 
 
63.8 
“Therefore, there is no reward greater than that of serving bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn,  and  there  is  no  sin  greater  than  that  of  spiting bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn.    Therefore,  if  a  person  wishes  to  make  his jeev powerful, 
then  he should sincerely  serve Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas by  thought, 
word, and deed.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 63 || 196 || 
 

GADHADÃ II 
- 583 - 
Gadhadã II – 64 
Purushottam Bhagvãn Is The Cause Of All Avatãrs 
 
64.1 
In the Samvat year 1881, on Posh sud 7 [27
th
 December 1824], Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress  with  a  large, 
cylindrical  pillow  that  had  been  placed  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on 
the  veranda  outside  the mandir of Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in  Dãdã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from various places, 
had gathered before Him. 
 
64.2 
Then, Svayamprakãshãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, are all avatãrs 
of Bhagvãn equal, or are there distinctions among them?” 
 
64.3 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  explained,  “After  listening  to  and  analytically 
thinking about all the shãstras written by Vyãsji, the conclusion I have 
reached  regarding  the avatãrs of Bhagvãn,  such  as Matsya, Kurma, 
Varãh,  and Nrusinh,  is  that Shree Krishna Bhagvãn is  the  source  of 
them  all.    That  is  to  say, Shree Krishna Bhagvãn is  not  an avatãr like 
the  other avatãrs,  but is Himself  the source  of  all avatãrs.    That  very 
Shree Krishna Bhagvãn is  our ishta-dev.  His divya charitras are 
narrated in the tenth skandh of the Shreemad Bhãgvat Purãn.  I have 
also considered it as a great authority in our Uddhav Sampradãy. 
 
64.4 
“As all other avatãrs are  also  of Shree Krishna Bhagvãn,  we  should 
respect  those avatãrs and  all shãstras which  describe  those avatãrs.  
Nevertheless,   we   should   primarily   respect   only Shree Krishna 
Bhagvãn and the shãstras which describe Him.” 
 
64.5 
Then, Purushottam Bhatt asked a question, “Bhagvãn created  this 
world for the kalyãn of the jeevs.  But, would it not have been possible 
for Bhagvãn, without creating this world, to grant kalyãn to the jeevs 
while  they  were  dormant  in  the  womb  of Mãyã?    Instead,  why  does 
He  take  the  trouble  of  creating  this  whole  world?    That  is  the 
question.” 

GADHADÃ II 
- 584 - 
64.6 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Bhagvãn Shree Krishna Purushottam is  the 
supreme ruler and is eternal.  He is forever present on His sinhãsan in 
His Akshardhãm.    Countless  millions  of brahmãnds reside  within  the 
refuge  of  that Akshardhãm.    For  example,  a  king  who  rules  over  the 
whole  world  owns  innumerable  villages;  and  of  those,  if  one  or  two 
were  to  become  deserted,  or  if  one  or  two  became  populated,  he 
would  not  even  take  notice.    Similarly, Shree Krishna Bhagvãn is  the 
lord  of  countless  millions  of brahmãnds.    However,  the brahmãnds 
are not destroyed all at once.  Therefore, if one or two brahmãnds are 
destroyed, Bhagvãn would not even take note of it. 
 
64.7 
“In addition, the birth of that Shree Krishna Bhagvãn from Devki is 
only for the sake of narration, because in actual fact, He is forever 
beyond birth. 
 
64.8 
“Furthermore, the Akshardhãm of Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn is  beyond 
Prakruti and Purush by   its vyatirek nature,   and   it   pervades 
everywhere by its anvay nature – just as ãkãsh is present everywhere 
by  its anvay nature,  and  is  beyond  the  four bhuts by  its vyatirek 
nature.  This is Shree Krishna Bhagvãn’s Akshardhãm. 
 
64.9 
“Moreover, Shree Krishna Bhagvãn forever  dwells  within  that dhãm.  
However,   despite   being present   in Akshardhãm,   He   also   grants 
darshan to   whomever,   wherever,   and   in   whichever   way   it   is 
necessary.    He  speaks  to  whomever  it  is  necessary  to  speak  to,  and 
even  touches  whomever  it  is  necessary  to  touch.    Just  as  a  person 
who  has  attained siddh-dashã can  see  for  thousands  of  miles  while 
remaining in one place, and hear talks from thousands of miles away, 
similarly,  despite  being  in  His Akshardhãm, Bhagvãn also  reveals 
Himself  in  the  countless  millions  of brahmãnds wherever  there  is  a 
need to be revealed.  Nevertheless, He Himself is still always present 
in  His Akshardhãm.    The  fact  that  He  remains  in  one  place  and  yet 
reveals   himself   in   countless   places   is   a   demonstration   of   his 
extraordinary   powers – just   as   during   the rãs-leelã,   when   He 

GADHADÃ II 
- 585 - 
assumed as many svarups as there were gopis.  This use of Bhagvãn’s 
extraordinary powers to remain in one place and at the same time to 
appear  in  countless  places  is  itself  His  pervasive svarup.    However, 
unlike ãkãsh, he does not pervade without possessing a svarup. 
 
64.10 
“Moreover,  by  the  extraordinary  powers  of Bhagvãn,   the   five 
hundred  million yojan surface  of  the pruthvi becomes  the  size  of  a 
sub-atomic  particle  at  the  time  of  destruction.    Then,  at  the  time  of 
creation,  from  being  sub-atomic  in  size,  the pruthvi again  becomes 
five hundred million yojans large.  Also, thunder, lightning, and dense 
clouds  of  rain  appear  in  the  monsoon  season.    These  and  all  other 
such wonders are all due to the extraordinary powers of Bhagvãn. 
 
64.11
 “That Shree Krishna Bhagvãn is   worthy   to   be   worshipped   by   a 
mumukshu in  every  way.    While  the  other avatãrs possessed  the 
greatness   of  maybe  one   or   two   powers, Shree Krishna Bhagvãn 
possesses  all  powers.    After  all, Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn is  not  only 
rasik,  He is  also  a tyãgi; He  possesses gnãn and  is  also  the sovereign 
ruler; He is a coward as well as brave; He is extremely compassionate 
and is a master of all extraordinary powers; and He is very strong as 
well  as  very  deceptive.    In  this  respect,  only Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn 
possesses all powers. 
 
64.12 
“It  is  in Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn’s Akshardhãm that  the  countless 
millions  of brahmãnds are  supported  forever.    Of  those,  when  the 
hundred   year   lifespan   (the   lifespan   of Brahmã)   of   a   particular 
brahmãnd ends,  that brahmãnd is  destroyed.    From  this,  it  is  clear 
that  not  all brahmãnds are  destroyed  as  the  same  time.    So,  if  other 
brahmãnds are  still  present  at  the  time  of  destruction,  why  should 
Bhagvãn grant kalyãn to the jeevs at that time?  This is the answer to 
the question.” 
 
64.13 
In    this    way,    Shreeji    Mahãrãj    indirectly    revealed    Himself    as 
Purushottam.    Upon  hearing  this,  all  the bhaktas realised  that  the 

GADHADÃ II 
- 586 - 
same Shree Krishna Purushottam is in actual fact Shreeji Mahãrãj, the 
son of Dharma and Bhakti. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 64 || 197 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 65 
The Darshan Of The Murti Of Bhagvãn 
The Over-Wise 
 
65.1 
In  the Samvat year  1881,  on Posh sud 11  [1
st
 January  1825],  Swãmi 
Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a decorated bedstead near 
the mandir of Shree Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Gadhadã.  He was dressed entirely in white clothes.  A sabhã of munis, 
as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
65.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Please listen, as I wish to speak about 
Bhagvãn.” 
 
65.3 
The sãdhus,  who  were  singing kirtans to  the  accompaniment  of  a 
pakhvãj,  stopped  singing.    They  then  folded  their  hands  and  settled 
down to listen. 
 
65.4 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj began, “When Bhagvãn takes birth on earth for 
the kalyãn of  the jeevs as  an avatãr,  such  as Rãm and Krishna,  He  is 
not infatuated by anything in this world, which is the result of Mãyã.  
In  fact,  due  to  His alokik majesty,  He  behaves  absolutely  fearlessly.  
However, for the sake of accepting the bhakti of His bhaktas, He also 
thoroughly indulges in the panch-vishays.  Seeing this, those people in 
the world who are over-wise, perceive faults in Bhagvãn.  They think, 
‘He may be called Bhagvãn, but He has more attachment to this world 
than we do’.   Thinking  this,  they consider Bhagvãn to  be human,  just 
like themselves, but they do not realise His alokik greatness.  This in 
itself is Bhagvãn’s Mãyã. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 587 - 
65.5 
“In fact, even a sãdhu who  has  realised  the ãtmã and  has  become 
brahm-rup is not infatuated upon seeing any object of this world.  So, 
what  is  surprising  about Shree Krishna Bhagvãn – who  is Parbrahm, 
and  who  is  greater  than Brahm – being  able  to  remain  uninfluenced 
by Mãyã and the result of Mãyã?  He certainly can.” 
 
65.6 
Having said this, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “A sãdhu who  has  attained 
ãtmã-nishthã also  possesses  intense vairãgya.    Due  to  both  of  these 
qualities,   he   will   not   become   attached   to   anything   in   any   way.  
However, if he does not possess bhakti towards Bhagvãn, it is as good 
as preparing many different types of food dishes but not adding salt; 
all  would  be  tasteless.    In  the  same  way,  without  the bhakti of 
Bhagvãn, ãtmã-nishthã and vairãgya alone  are  simply  useless;  a 
person can never attain kalyãn through them. 
 
65.7 
“Realising this, Shukji studied the Shreemad Bhãgvat and offered 
great bhakti to Shree Krishna Bhagvãn,   despite   having   already 
become brahm-svarup.  Therefore, it is a great deficiency of a person 
who has ãtmã-nishthã to not have bhakti towards Bhagvãn. 
 
65.8 
“In the same way, if a person has bhakti towards Bhagvãn,  but  does 
not  have ãtmã-nishthã and vairãgya,  then  just  as  a  person  has  love 
towards Bhagvãn,  he  will  also  develop  love  towards  other  things.  
Therefore,  this  is  a  major  deficiency  for  those following  the  path  of 
bhakti. 
 
65.9 
“Now, a perfect bhakta of Bhagvãn has thoroughly realised Bhagvãn’s 
greatness;  so,  everything  except Bhagvãn seems  worthless  to  him.  
That  is  why  he  is  not  infatuated  by  anything.    Therefore,  when  a 
person  possesses  all  three  qualities  of ãtmã-nishthã, vairãgya,  and 
bhakti towards Bhagvãn,  he  can  be  said  to  have  no  deficiencies 
whatsoever.    Such  a  person  is  called  a bhakta with gnãn,  an ekãntik 
bhakta, and a loyal bhakta of Bhagvãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 65 || 198 || 

GADHADÃ II 
- 588 - 
Gadhadã II – 66 
A Person Cannot Recognise His Own Avgun 
A Red-Hot Iron Ball 
 
66.1 
In  the Samvat year  1881,  on Posh vad 1  [5
th
 January  1825],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress  with  a  large, 
cylindrical  pillow  that  had  been  placed  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on 
the  veranda  outside  the  east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr 
in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in white  clothes.    Garlands  of 
yellow  flowers  and  red guldãvadi flowers  were  hanging  around  His 
neck,  and  a  tassel  of  yellow  flowers  decorated  His pãgh.    A sabhã of 
munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before Him in a sabhã.  Some of the sãdhus were singing a vishnupad 
to the accompaniment of a sarodã and dukad. 
 
66.2
 After the kirtans had finished, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Today, I wish to 
ask  all  the  senior sãdhus some questions.”  Having said this, He 
directed His first question to Ãnandãnand Swãmi.  He said, “Suppose 
there is a person who recognises his own faults and does not look at 
the avgun of other bhaktas, despite having little intelligence; instead, 
he  looks  only  at  their gun.    On  the  other  hand,  suppose  there  is 
another  person  who  is  very  intelligent,  but  he  does  not  see  his  own 
avgun.    Moreover,  he  overlooks  the gun of  other bhaktas and  looks 
only  at  their avgun.   Why  is  it  that  the  person  with  little  intelligence 
finds avgun in  himself,  whereas  the  person  with  much  intelligence 
cannot realise his own avgun?  That is the question.” 
 
66.3 
Ãnãnd Swãmi answered to the bet of his ability, but he was unable to 
give a satisfactory reply. 
 
66.4 
So, Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “The answer to that is as follows:  It is 
because  that  person  has  offended  some  great bhakta of Bhagvãn 
either in this life or in a past life.  As a result of that sin, his intellect 
has  become  corrupted.    That  is  why  he  perceives avgun in bhaktas 
without  being  able  to  realise avgun in  himself.    This  is  the  only 
answer to that question.” 

GADHADÃ II 
- 589 - 
66.5 
Next, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked Nityãnand Swãmi a question, “Is there 
only one method to attain Bhagvãn, or are there many?  You may say 
that Bhagvãn can  be  attained  by  four  methods – gnãn, vairãgya, 
bhakti,  and dharma.    However,  if Bhagvãn is  attained  by  these  four 
methods, then the principle that kalyãn can be attained exclusively by 
seeking the refuge Bhagvãn is invalid.” 
 
66.6 
Nityãnand  Swãmi  tried  to  answer  the  question  in  many  different 
ways, but was unable to do so satisfactorily. 
 
66.7 
So, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Kalyãn is  only  attained  by  the  refuge  of 
Bhagvãn.    However, Bhagvãn is  very  powerful;  even  the devs live 
under His ãgnã.  In fact, out of fear of Bhagvãn, even the causes of all 
the brahmãnds,  such  as Kãl and Mãyã,  faithfully  follow  His ãgnã.  
Therefore, a bhakta of Bhagvãn should also strictly  follow Bhagvãn’s 
ãgnã; that is the very characteristic of a bhakta of Bhagvãn.  For this 
reason, all other spiritual activities should also be performed strictly.  
Therefore, kalyãn is  possible  only  through Bhagvãn,  whereas  those 
spiritual  activities  are  for  the  purpose  of  pleasing Bhagvãn.    That  is 
the only answer to the question.” 
 
66.8 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked Brahmãnand Swãmi, “Is the jeev that 
dwells within the body, sãkãr, or is it nirãkãr?” 
 
66.9 
Brahmãnand Swãmi replied, “It possesses a svarup.” 
 
66.10 
Hearing this, Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If the jeev did possess a svarup, 
then that would mean it has hands, feet, and other limbs.  However, a 
shlok in  the  tenth skandh of  the  Shreemad  Bhãgvat  states, ‘Bhagvãn 
created  the  buddhi,  indriyas,  man,  and  prãns  to  enable  the  jeev  to 
attain kalyãn’.  If the jeev itself did possess a svarup, then what would 
be  the  need  of  creating  the buddhi, indriyas, man,  and prãns for  it?  
Therefore, after seeing such words in the shãstras, a person can only 
conclude that the jeev is sachidãnand. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 590 - 
66.11
 “That jeev also possesses the kãran body, which is the embodiment of 
eternal  ignorance.    Just  as  a  magnetic  rock  attracts  iron  and  then 
sticks   to   the   iron,   similarly,   the jeev has   a   nature   of   sticking.  
Therefore,  the jeev sticks  to  the  two mãyik bodies – the sthul body 
and  the sukshma body.    Then,  due  to  its  ignorance,  the jeev believes 
those  bodies  to  be  its  own.    In  reality,  the jeev is  not  at  all  like  those 
bodies.” 
 
66.12 
Then, Brahmãnand Swãmi asked, “After the ignorance of the jeev is 
removed  by  the bhakti of Bhagvãn,  the  association  between  the jeev 
and  the  three mãyik bodies  (sthul, sukshma,  and kãran)  no  longer 
remains.    So,  when  the jeev attains  the dhãm of Bhagvãn,  with  what 
type of svarup does it stay there?” 
 
66.13 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “When the jeev’s ignorance  is  dispelled,  its 
association  with  the  three mãyik bodies  is  broken.    Then,  the jeev 
remains  pure  and  composed  of chaitanya.    Then,  by Bhagvãn’s will, 
the jeev receives  a  body  composed  of chaitanya prakruti – which  is 
distinct  from  the  eight  types  of jad prakruti of Bhagvãn.    Then,  with 
that  body,  the jeev stays  in Bhagvãn’s Akshardhãm.    This  is  the 
answer to your question.” 
 
66.14 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked Gopãlãnand Swãmi a question; “It is due 
to  the  grace  of Bhagvãn and  His sant that  a  person  can  master 
ashtãng-yog or  see  the ãtmã.    Then,  why  is  it  that  even  though 
Bhagvãn and His sant are the cause of these, they become secondary; 
and instead, a person’s interest in yog and ãtmã-nishthã increases?” 
 
66.15 
Gopãlãnand Swãmi replied, “After practicing ashtãng-yog,  when  a 
person  actually  masters  it,  he  develops  a  little  pride.    As  a  result,  he 
becomes somewhat less interested in Bhagvãn.” 
 
66.16 
To this, Shreeji Mahãrãj commented, “When a yogi attains siddh-
dashã, he also becomes brahm-rup, and no form of pride is possible in 
brahm.  Therefore, your answer is not correct.” 

GADHADÃ II 
- 591 - 
66.17 
Gopãlãnand Swãmi then said, “Mahãrãj, I cannot understand this.  
Please be compassionate and explain it to me.” 
 
66.18 
So, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “It should be understood  in  the  following 
way:   When   a   person   wishes   to   eradicate   his   faults,   he   should 
eradicate them after seeking advice of a great sant.  For example, if a 
person   has   some   worldly   task   to   perform,   and   he   wants   to 
accomplish  that  job  extremely  well,  he  should  seek  the  advice  of 
some experts.  Similarly, such advice is also necessary for eradicating 
faults.    For  example,  even  though  Shukji  had  become brahm-svarup, 
he  studied  the  Shreemad  Bhãgvat  with  great  enthusiasm.    In  fact, 
even to this very day, he engages in the bhakti of Bhagvãn.  Also, the 
eighty-eight thousand rushis, including Shaunak, had become brahm-
svarup;  but,  they  too  listened  to  the kathãs related  to Bhagvãn from 
Sutpurãni.    Therefore,  a  person  should  take  guidance  from  such 
words to strengthen his bhakti. 
 
66.19 
“For the faults that a person cannot recognise, he should pray to 
Bhagvãn:   ‘Mahãrãj, please be compassionate and destroy whichever 
faults  I  may  have’ – just   as   when   a   man   has   been   accused   of 
something and has no witnesses to disprove the allegation, he proves 
his  innocence  by  holding  a  red-hot  iron  ball.    Similarly,  if  a  fault 
cannot  be  realised,  he  should  pray  to Bhagvãn for  the  eradication  of 
that  fault,  which  amounts  to  holding  the  iron  ball.    A  person  should 
eradicate his faults in this way.  That is the answer to your question.” 
 
66.20 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked Muktãnand Swãmi a question:  “Suppose 
a bhakta of Bhagvãn has  thoroughly  realised Bhagvãn,  but Bhagvãn 
does  not  show  him  any  miracles.    Now,  if  some  other  performer  of 
magical spells does show him a miracle, then upon seeing this, would 
the mind of that bhakta sway from Bhagvãn, or not?” 
 
66.21 
Muktãnand  Swãmi  replied,  “Mahãrãj,  if  a  person  has  absolute 
nishchay in Bhagvãn,  then  he  would  never  have nishchay in  anyone 

GADHADÃ II 
- 592 - 
but Bhagvãn.    On  the  other  hand,  if  a  person  does  have nishchay in 
someone else, then he does not have nishchay in Bhagvãn at all.  Such 
a person is merely a false bhakta; he cannot be called a true bhakta of 
Bhagvãn.” 
 
66.22 
Hearing this, Shreeji Mahãrãj agreed, “That is the exact answer to the 
question.” 
 
66.23
 Finally, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked Shuk Muni, “If a bhakta of Bhagvãn has 
attained  the  understanding  of Bhagvãn and  His sant,  then  how  does 
he benefit while he is alive, and how does he benefit after he dies?” 
 
66.24 
Shuk Muni said, “Mahãrãj, that question can be answered only by 
you.” 
 
66.25 
So, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “While alive, a person who has attained 
Bhagvãn and His sant spends his days and nights engrossed in kathãs 
and kirtans related  to Bhagvãn.    He  also  has  the  direct  realisation  of 
his jeevãtmã,  which  is  beyond  the  three  mental  states,  as  being 
brahm-rup.  With the exception of Bhagvãn, he develops vairãgya for 
all other objects.  Also, he discards adharma and abides by dharma. 
 
66.26 
“When that bhakta dies, Bhagvãn makes him just like Himself.  In fact, 
Bhagvãn had  blessed Brahma:   ‘O Brahmã!  By my grace, may you 
know me as I am, my glory as it is, and my qualities and actions as they 
are’.  So, just as Bhagvãn has blessed Brahmã, He also grants the same 
blessings to all of His faithful bhaktas.  In addition, just as Bhagvãn is 
free  from Kãl, karma,  and Mãyã,  in  the  same  way,  these bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn also  becomes  free  from Kãl, karma,  and Mãyã.    Also,  he 
forever  resides  in  the sevã of Bhagvãn.    This  is  how  that bhakta 
benefits  after  he  abandons  his  body.    That  is  the  answer  to  the 
question.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 66 || 199 || 

GADHADÃ II 
- 593 - 
Gadhadã II – 67 
The Gangãjaliyo Well 
Becoming Like Bhagvãn 
 
67.1 
In the Samvat year 1881, on Mahã vad 3 [6
th
 February 1825], Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress  with  a  large, 
cylindrical  pillow  that  had  been  placed  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on 
the  platform  near  the  Gangãjaliyo  well  adjacent  to  His  residence  in 
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was dressed entirely in white 
clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from various places, 
had gathered before Him in a sabhã.  Some of the sãdhus were singing 
a vishnupad to the accompaniment of a sarodã and dukad. 
  
67.2 
After  thinking  about  the kirtans, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “I wish to ask 
all the sãdhus the following question:  A bhakta of Bhagvãn leaves his 
body,  becomes brahm-rup,  and  attains  the dhãm of Bhagvãn.    Then, 
what  is  the  difference  between  that bhakta and Bhagvãn,  whereby 
the  master-servant  relationship  between  them  still  remains?    After 
all,  that bhakta of Bhagvãn then  becomes  independent,  just  like 
Bhagvãn.  He also becomes free from the restraints of Kãl, karma, and 
Mãyã – just like Bhagvãn.  Therefore, what difference remains so that 
the master-servant relationship is maintained?  This is my question.” 
 
67.3 
The paramhans answered according to their understanding, but they 
could not give a precise answer to Shreeji Mahãrãj’s question.  So, all 
the sãdhus said, “Mahãrãj, your question will only be answered when 
you yourself answer it.” 
 
67.4 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  explained,  “The  answer is  as  follows:    In 
whatever   way   a bhakta of Bhagvãn has   understood Bhagvãn –
‘Bhagvãn possesses this many powers; He possesses  this  much  charm; 
He is the embodiment of bliss’ – that  is  the  extent  to  which  he  has 
understood the greatness of Bhagvãn.  Then, when that bhakta leaves 
his  body  and  goes  to  the dhãm of Bhagvãn,  he  attains  charm  and 

GADHADÃ II 
- 594 - 
powers  based  on  the  extent  to  which he  has  realised  the  majesty  of 
Bhagvãn.    Despite  this,  that bhakta still  feels Bhagvãn’s majesty  (His 
powers  and  charm)  to  be  much  greater.    He  then  realises, ‘Bhagvãn 
has granted me just as many divya powers and as much charm as I had 
realised in Him.  Yet, Bhagvãn’s divya powers and charm appear to be 
totally limitless.  Like me, countless others have also attained qualities 
similar  to  that  of  Bhagvãn,  but  no  one  is  capable  of  becoming  like 
Bhagvãn’. 
 
67.5 
“This is because not even Shesh, Shãrada, Brahmã, the  other devs, or 
the  four  Veds can  understand  the  vastness  of Bhagvãn’s greatness, 
His qualities, His actions, His birth, His power, His charm, His blissful 
nature,  or  His  countless  other kalyãn-kãri.    In  fact, Bhagvãn Himself 
cannot   understand   the   limits   of   His   own   greatness.      Therefore, 
Bhagvãn, with all of His powers, is beyond all limits. 
 
67.6 
“By worshipping that Bhagvãn,  countless  millions  of Vaishnavs have 
become    like Bhagvãn.        However, Bhagvãn’s majesty    has    not 
diminished  even  slightly.    For  example,  even  if  there  were  an  ocean 
filled  with  sweet  water  from  which  all  humans,  animals,  and  birds 
could drink as much as they wished, and from which vessels could be 
filled,  the  water  would  still  not  decrease  because  of  the  vastness  of 
the  ocean.   Similarly, Bhagvãn’s greatness is  infinite;  there  is  no  way 
in  which  it  can  either  increase  or  decrease.    For  this  reason,  those 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn who   become brahm-svarup,   still   behave   as 
Bhagvãn’s servants  and  engage  in  His  worship.    In  this  way, bhaktas 
of Bhagvãn attain  qualities  similar  to  those  of Bhagvãn;  but,  the 
master-servant relationship between them is maintained.  That is the 
answer to the question.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 67 || 200 || 
 
 
|| End of Shree Gadhadã Madhya Prakaran ||

VADTÃL 
- 595 - 
|| SHREE SWÃMINÃRAYAN VIJAYTETRÃM || 
 
VACHANÃMRUT 
Shree Vadtãl Prakaran 
 
Vadtãl – 1 
Nirvikalp Samãdhi 
 
1.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Kãrtik sud 11  [21
st
 November  1825], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  cushion  with  a 
cylindrical  pillow  that  had  been  placed  on  a sinhãsan in  the  mango 
grove along the banks of Lake Gomti on the north side of the mandir 
of Shree Lakshmi-Nãrãyan in  Vadtãl.    He  was  wearing  a  white survãl 
and a white angarkhu.  He had also tied a blue reto around His waist.  
An  orange reto with  edges  decorated  with  golden  threads  was  tied 
around  His  head,  and  another  orange reto with  a  brocaded  border 
was resting upon His shoulder.  In addition to this, a garland of roses 
was hanging around His neck, tassels of roses had been placed upon 
His  head,  and bãjubandh and gajarã had  been  tied  around  His  arms.  
Shreeji Mahãrãj sat in a charming way facing north, while a sabhã of 
munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  gathered  before 
Him. 
 
1.2 
Shobhã-Rãm  Shãstri  of  Vadodarã  asked  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  a  question:  
“Mahãrãj, when a mumukshu attains nirvikalp samãdhi,  he  becomes 
gunãtit and  an ekãntik bhakta of Bhagvãn.   Then, what  becomes of  a 
person who does not attain nirvikalp samãdhi?” 
 
1.3 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Nirvikalp samãdhi is not only attained 
when  the prãns are  controlled.    There  is  another  way  to  attain 
nirvikalp samãdhi,  which  I  shall  explain  to  you;  so,  please  listen 
carefully. 
 
1.4 
“The Shreemad Bhãgvat states: 

VADTÃL 
- 596 - 
atra sargo visargash-cha sthãnam poshanam-utayaha 
manvanta-reshãnu-katha nirodho muktir-ãshrayaha 
The ten characteristics of topics of discussion by which Bhagvãn can be 
realised: sarg, visarg, sthãn, poshan, uti, manvantar-kathã, ishãnu-kathã, 
nirodh, mukti, ãshray. 
  
 “This verse explains that when a mumukshu establishes  a  firm  belief 
of Shree Krishna Bhagvãn, who a person should take the refuge of and 
who  can  be  realised  through  the  nine  characteristics,  then  he  will 
never  have  a  doubt.    For  example,  once  a  person  has  firmly  realised 
that this is a mango tree, then even if he is overcome by kãm, krodh, 
lobh, he will not entertain any doubts such as, ‘Is this a mango tree or 
not?’  In the same way, regardless of whether a person has controlled 
his prãns or not, if he has firm belief of the pratyaksha svarup of Shree 
Krishna Bhagvãn – without  any  doubts  whatsoever – then  he  has 
attained nirvikalp samãdhi. 
 
1.5 
“However, someone may repeatedly have doubts in his mind about 
Bhagvãn’s nature.  For example, he may think, ‘What must Bhagvãn’s 
svarup be like in Akshardhãm?  What must His svarup be like in Shvet-
Dvip and Vaikunth?  When will I have the darshan of that svarup?’  He 
continues  to  have  such  doubts  in  his  mind,  but  he  does  not feel 
fulfilled  by  realising  that  the pratyaksha svarup of Bhagvãn that  he 
has attained is the cause of everything.  Even if he attains samãdhi by 
Bhagvãn’s wish, his doubts are never eradicated.  No matter what he 
sees in samãdhi, he always desires to see something new; the desires 
of his mind are never suppressed.  Even if such a person experiences 
samãdhi,  it  is savikalp samãdhi;  and  even  if  he  does  not  experience 
samãdhi, it is still savikalp samãdhi.  Therefore, such a person cannot 
be  called  a gunãtit, ekãntik bhakta.    A  person  who  does  have  firm 
nishchay in Bhagvãn,  regardless  of  whether  he  has samãdhi or  not, 
can be said to have constant nirvikalp samãdhi.” 
 
1.6 
Then,  Dinã-Nãth Bhatt asked, “What will become of a person who 
fails to conquer the mind, despite attempting to eradicate the desires 
in his mind?” 

VADTÃL 
- 597 - 
1.7 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “As the war between the Kauravs and the 
Pãndavs was set to begin, the Kauravs and the Pãndavs thought, ‘Let 
us engage in the battle in such a holy place that even if we are killed in 
the fighting, our jeev will still benefit.’  With this thought in mind, they 
eventually fought a battle, attained Dev-Lok, and obtained happiness 
greater than that of ruling over a kingdom. 
 
1.8 
“Therefore, regarding a person who takes up a fight with his mind – if 
he  wins,  then  he  attains nirvikalp samãdhi and  becomes  an ekãntik 
bhakta of Bhagvãn.    However,  if  he  should  lose  to  his  mind,  he  falls 
from his spiritual activities.  Then, maybe after one life or two lives or 
even  after  many  lives, he  will  become  an ekãntik bhakta;  but,  his 
efforts will not have been useless. 
 
1.9 
“Therefore, a person who is wise should definitely develop hatred 
towards his mind for the sake of his kalyãn.  Then, if he conquers his 
mind, he is sure to benefit; but, even if he is defeated by his mind, he 
will  eventually  return  to  the  path  of  enlightenment  which  is  also 
beneficial  in  the  end.    Therefore,  a  person  who  aspires  for kalyãn 
should most certainly develop hatred towards his mind.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 1 || 201 || 
 
 
Vadtãl – 2 
Realising Bhagvãn Through The Five Shãstras 
 
2.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Kãrtik sud 13  [22
nd
 November  1825], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated 
bedstead  under  a  mango  tree  on  the  banks  of  Lake  Gomti,  north  of 
the mandir of Shree Lakshmi-Nãrãyan in  Vadtãl.    He  was  wearing  a 
survãl made  from  yellow,  silken  cloth  and  a  red dagli made  from 
kinkhãb.    He  had  also  tied  a pãgh around  His  head  using  an  orange 
cloth  with  a  brocaded  border.    An  orange shelu with  a  brocaded 

VADTÃL 
- 598 - 
border  was  placed  upon  His  shoulder.    In  addition  to  this,  His pãgh 
was  decorated  with  garlands  of champã flowers,  and  garlands  of 
white  flowers  were  hanging  around  His  neck.    A sabhã of munis,  as 
well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
2.2 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “Please  begin  a  question-answer 
discussion.” 
 
2.3 
Then,  Kãndãsji  Patel  of  the  village  Buvã  folded  his  hands  and  asked, 
“Mahãrãj, by what means does Bhagvãn become pleased?” 
 
2.4 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If we do not insult Bhagvãn,  then Bhagvãn 
becomes  pleased.   Then, you  may  ask, ‘What does it mean to criticise 
Bhagvãn?’  Well, Bhagvãn is the all-doer of this world.  However, if a 
person  does  not  understand  Him  to  be  the  all-doer  and  instead 
believes  that  it  is Kãl that  is  the  all-doer  of  this  world,  or  that  it  is 
Mãyã,  or  that  it  is karma,  or  that  is  the svabhãv that  is  the all-doer, 
then he is insulting Bhagvãn.  This is because actually Bhagvãn is the 
all-doer.  To ignore this and to claim that only Kãl, karma, Mãyã, and 
svabhãv are the all-doers of this world is serious against Bhagvãn. 
 
2.5 
“For example, you are the Patel (chief of a village) of your village.  If 
someone does not acknowledge your status in the village, then he can 
be  said  to  be  your  slanderer.    Also,  if  someone  does  not  accept  the 
control of an emperor of the world, but instead accepts the control of 
a  person  who  is  not  even  a  king,  then  that  man  is  known  as  a 
slanderer  of  the  emperor.    If  a  person  writes  and  distributes  letters 
stating, ‘Our king has no nose and ears; he has no hands or feet’,  and 
therefore, describes the king as being deformed even though he has a 
normal  body,  then  he  is  also  known  as  a  slanderer  of  the  king.  
Similarly, Bhagvãn is complete, with limbs, hands, and feet.  There is 
not  the  slightest  deformation  in  any  of  His  limbs.    He  eternally 
possesses a definite svarup.  So, to say that He is not the all-doer and 
is nirãkãr,  and  that Kãl, Mãyã, karma are  the  cause  of  all – not 
Bhagvãn – is equivalent to insulting Bhagvãn. 

VADTÃL 
- 599 - 
2.6 
“A person who does not insult Bhagvãn in  this  way  is  said  to  have 
performed  perfect pujã of Bhagvãn.    Otherwise,  without  such  an 
understanding,  even  if  a person  performs pujã by  offering  items  like 
sandalwood  paste  and  flowers,  he  is  still  a  slanderer  of Bhagvãn.  
Therefore, Bhagvãn is  only  pleased  upon  a  person  who  realises 
Bhagvãn to possess a definite svarup and to be the creator, sustainer, 
and destroyer of the universe. 
 
2.7 
“In the Veds, Bhagvãn Himself  has  described  His  nature  in  many 
ways,  but  no  one  could  understand  it.    Then,  the  Sãnkhya shãstras 
prescribed  the  twenty-four tattvas and  said  that Bhagvãn is  the 
twenty-fifth tattva.    The ãchãrya of  the  Sãnkhya  philosophy,  Kapil 
Muni,  thought, ‘The jeev behaves as if it is one with the three types of 
bodies (sthul, sukshma, and kãran) and it cannot remain separate from 
them.  The ishvar also behaves as if it is one with its three bodies (virãt, 
sutrãtmã, and avyãkrut) and it too cannot remain separate from them.’  
Therefore,  the  Sãnkhya shãstras count jeev and ishvar amongst  the 
twenty-four tattvas and  claim Paramãtmã to  be  the  twenty-fifth 
tattva. 
 
2.8 
“The ãchãrya of  the  Yog shãstras,  Hiranyagarbh  Rushi,  explains  that 
there are twenty-four tattvas, and that jeev and ishvar are the twenty-
fifth tattva; but, Paramãtmã is the twenty-sixth. 
 
2.9 
“This is how the Sãnkhya shãstras and  the  Yog shãstras described 
Bhagvãn’s nature;  still,  no  one  attained  understanding  of  the  nature 
of the Bhagvãn as He is.  So, according to the Sãnkhya shãstras, it was 
concluded, ‘Whatever  is  greater  than  the  twenty-four   elements   is 
satya’;   and   according   to   the   Yog shãstras,   it   was   concluded, 
‘Paramãtmã, who is greater than jeev and ishvar, who themselves is 
beyond the twenty-four elements, is satya’.  In this way, through these 
two  philosophies,  the  nature  of Bhagvãn was  realised.    However,  is 
that Bhagvãn black,  or  yellow?    Is  He  tall,  or  short?    Is  He sãkãr,  or 
nirãkãr?  That was not realised. 

VADTÃL 
- 600 - 
2.10 
“Then, Vãsudev Bhagvãn composed the Panch-Rãtra Tãntra, in which 
he  explained, ‘In his own Akshardhãm, Shree Krishna Purushottam 
Bhagvãn  eternally  possesses  a  divya  sãkãr  murti.    This  Bhagvãn  gives 
darshan  five  times  to  the  countless  niranna-muktas  of  Shvet-Dvip.    In 
Vaikunth,  that  same  Bhagvãn  assumes  a  four-armed  form,  holding  a 
shankh,  a  chakra,  a  gadã,  and  a  padma.    Along  with  Him  is  Lakshmiji.  
He  is  also  served  by  Vishvaksen  and  other  pãrshads.    It  is  that  same 
Bhagvãn  who  is  worthy  of  being  offered  pujã,  worthy  of  worship  and 
worthy  of  attainment.    It  is  that  same  Bhagvãn  who  assumes  the 
avatars  of  Ram  and  Krishna,  and  who  appears  in  the  four  forms  of 
Vãsudev,  Sankarshan,  Pradyumna,  and  Aniruddha’.      In   this   way, 
Vãsudev Bhagvãn explained that Bhagvãn possesses a sãkãr murti. 
 
2.11
 “Then, Nãradji revised  that  same  Panch-Rãtra  Tãntra,  after  which  it 
came  to  be  known  as  the  Nãrad  Panch-Rãtra.    In  that, Bhagvãn’s 
svarup was explained in such a way that not even the slightest doubt 
remained.    Also,  Shivji  explained  the  four-armed svarup and  eight-
armed svarup of Bhagvãn in the Pashupãt-Shãstra. 
 
2.12
 “Therefore, the Shreemad Bhãgvat states: 
 
nãrãyana-parã vedã devã nãrãyan-ãngajãhã 
nãrãyana-parã lokã nãrãyana-parã makhãhã 
nãrãyana-paro yogo nãrãyana-param tapaha 
nãrãyana-param gnãnam nãrãyana-parã gatihi 
The Veds are devoted to Nãrãyan, and the essence of the Veds is Nãrãyan; the 
devs are all formed from the svarup of Nãrãyan; the loks are all devoted to 
Nãrãyan, and all the loks are pervaded by Nãrãyan; all yagnas are devoted to 
Nãrãyan.  All yog is devoted to Nãrãyan; all tap is devoted to Nãrãyan; all 
gnãn is devoted to Nãrãyan; and Nãrãyan is the objective of all activities. 
 
vãsudeva-parã vedã vãsudeva-parã makhãhã 
vãsudeva-parã yogã vãsudeva-parãhã kriyãhã 
vãsudeva-param gnãnam vãsudeva-param tapaha 
vãsudeva-paro dharmo vãsudeva-parã gatihi 
The Veds are devoted to Vãsudev, and the essence of the Veds is Vãsudev; all 
yagnas are devoted to Vãsudev; all yog is devoted to Vãsudev; all activities are 

VADTÃL 
- 601 - 
devoted to Vãsudev.  All gnãn is devoted to Vãsudev; all tap is devoted to 
Vãsudev; all dharma is devoted to Vãsudev; and Vãsudev is the objective of all 
activities. 
 
2.13 
“Therefore,  the  five shãstras have  described  the  nature  of Shree 
Krishna Vãsudev only.    Only  a  person  who  realises Bhagvãn through 
these  five shãstras can  be  said  to  possess  total gnãn.    For  example, 
only  when  a  person  sees  with  his  eyes  does  he  come  to  know  that 
milk  is  white;  only  when  he  smells  with  his  nose  does  he  come  to 
know its smell; only when he touches it with his finger does he come 
to know whether it is hot or cold; and only when he tastes it with his 
tongue does he come to know its taste.  In this way, only when milk is 
tested through all the indriyas can a person totally know its nature; it 
cannot  be  totally  known  through  one indriya alone.    Similarly,  a 
person  realises Bhagvãn’s nature  totally  when  he  realises  it  through 
the five shãstras.  To have such knowledge is called total gnãn. 
 
2.14 
“Bhagvãn is     pleased     only     upon     someone     who     has     such 
understanding;  there  is  no  other  means  of  pleasing  Him.    Therefore, 
only a person who has this understanding can be said to possess total 
gnãn,  and Bhagvãn becomes  extremely  pleased  only  upon  such  a 
person.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 2 || 202 || 
 
 
Vadtãl – 3 
Bhakti Coupled With Bhagvãn’s Greatness 
 
3.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Kãrtik vad 11  [6
th
 December  1825], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a sinhãsan in  the 
mandir of Shree Lakshmi-Nãrãyan in Vadtãl.  He was dressed entirely 
in  white  clothes.    He  was  also  wearing  garlands  of  roses  around  His 
neck,  and  tassels  decorated  the pãgh upon  His  head.    A sabhã of  all 
the munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before Him. 

VADTÃL 
- 602 - 
3.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “In our Uddhav Sampradãy a person who 
has dharma, gnãn, vairãgya, and bhakti towards Bhagvãn is called an 
ekãntik bhakta, and only he is worthy of being made renowned in our 
satsang.  However, if these four qualities are not perfect and only one 
is  predominant,  then  which  of  the  four  is  the  best,  and  incorporates 
the other three?”  
 
3.3 
Gopãlãnand Swãmi and Muktãnand Swãmi replied, “Mahãrãj, dharma 
is  the  best,  because  if  there  is dharma then  the  other  three  qualities 
will eventually develop in that person.” 
 
3.4 
To this, Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Dharma may  be  present  even  in 
those  who  are vimukhs.    Does  that  mean  that  we  should  make  them 
renowned in satsang?” 
 
3.5 
Hearing  this  argument,  no  one  could  give  a  reply  to  the  question.  
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then explained,  “If  a  person has bhakti towards 
Bhagvãn coupled  with  knowledge  of  His  greatness,  he  will  never  fall 
from dharma – even  if  he  has  a  lesser  degree  of ãtmã-nishthã, 
vairãgya,   and dharma.      This   is   because   a   person   who   realises 
Bhagvãn’s greatness,  thinks, ‘If Brahmã and all the other devs follow 
Bhagvãn’s ãgnã, then how can I not follow His ãgnã?’  Bearing  this  in 
mind, he always abides by the niyams prescribed by Bhagvãn.” 
 
3.6
 Then, Shuk Muni asked, “If bhakti coupled  with  the  knowledge  of 
Bhagvãn’s greatness   alone   is   enough,   why   are   all   four   qualities 
prescribed as essential, and not just bhakti alone?” 
 
3.7 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If a person has intense bhakti for Bhagvãn 
coupled  with  the  knowledge  of  His  greatness,  then  all  three  are 
incorporated  in bhakti alone.    But,  if  his bhakti is  of  a  medium 
intensity,   then   the   other   three   are   not   incorporated   within   it.  
Therefore, it is said, ‘A person who has the type of bhakti which include 
all four qualities can be called an ekãntik bhakta’. 

VADTÃL 
- 603 - 
3.8 
“Pruthu Rãjã had such extraordinary bhakti.  When Bhagvãn awarded 
a vardãn upon  him,  he  asked  for  ten  thousand  ears  in  order  to  hear 
kathãs related  to Bhagvãn;  he  did  not ask  for  anything  else.    Also, 
some gopis who  were  forbidden  to  go  and  play rãs discarded  their 
bodies  and  went  to Shree  Krishna in  spirit.    If  a  person  has  such 
extraordinary bhakti,    then    the    other    three    qualities    are    all 
incorporated in bhakti alone.” 
 
3.9
 Brahmãnand  Swãmi  then  asked,  “By  what  means  can  such 
extraordinary bhakti be attained?” 
 
3.10 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “It is attained by serving a great sant.  
There  are  four  types  of  great sant.    One  is  like  a  small  flame,  the 
second is like a torch, the third is like lightning, and the fourth is like 
the vadvãnal fire. 
 
3.11 
“A person, who is like a small flame, is extinguished by the wind in 
the form of the vishays.  A person, who is like a torch, is extinguished 
by stronger gusts of wind in the form of the vishays.  A person, who is 
like  lightning,  is  not  extinguished  even  by  rainwater  in  the  form  of 
mãyã.    However, vadvãnal fire  stays  in  the  ocean  without  being 
extinguished by the ocean water; it drinks the sea water and excretes 
it in the form of sweet water; in turn, the clouds carry this water and 
shower  it  upon  the  world;  and  from  this,  many  types  of  tastes  are 
formed.    Similarly,  a  great sant,  like  the vadvãnal fire,  transforms 
even the ‘salty’ jeevs who  are  like  the  saline  sea  water,  into ‘sweet’ 
jeevs. 
 
3.12 
“Of the four types of great sant just  described,  if  a  person  serves 
someone  who  is  like  lightning  or  the vadvãnal fire – by  thought, 
word,  and  deed,  and  while  staying  within  his dharma – then bhakti 
coupled  with  the  knowledge  of Bhagvãn’s greatness  develops  in  that 
person. 
 
3.13 
“Also, a person should realise that the person who is like lightning is 
known  as Bhagvãn’s ekãntik sãdhu – who  is  in sãdhan-dashã.    The 

VADTÃL 
- 604 - 
person  who  is  like  the vadvãnal fire  is  known  as Bhagvãn’s great 
ekãntik sant – who has attained siddh-dashã.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 3 || 203 || 
 
 
Vadtãl – 4 
The Thirty Qualities Of A Sant 
 
4.1
 In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Mãgshar sud 10  [19
th
 December  1825], 
Swãmi Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in the mandir of Shree 
Lakshmi-Nãrãyan in Vadtãl.  He was dressed entirely in white clothes.  
A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had 
gathered before Him. 
 
4.2 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “Please  being  a  question-answer 
discussion.” 
 
4.3 
Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “For a bhakta of Bhagvãn who  has 
taken  the  path  of bhakti, which  one spiritual  activity  includes  all  the 
other activities for kalyãn?” 
 
4.4 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “All  the  spiritual  activities  for  attaining 
kalyãn are included in keeping the company – by thought, word, and 
deed – of a sant who possesses the thirty qualities of a sãdhu.” 
 
4.5
 After replying to the question, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Suppose there 
is an ekãntik bhakta yogi who realises that the philosophy of both the 
Sãnkhya shãstras and  the  Yog shãstras is  based  upon  only Vãsudev-
Nãrãyan.    By  what  means  does  that yogi fix  his vrutti on Bhagvãn’s 
murti?    How  does  he  control  his mind?    How  does he  keep his vrutti 
facing  inwards?    How  does  he  keep  his vrutti facing  outwards?    By 
which   of   his yogic abilities   does   he   separate   himself   from   the 
obstacles  of  disturbing  thoughts  and  desires,  as  well  as  from  the 
absorption of sleep?  Please answer these questions.” 

VADTÃL 
- 605 - 
 
4.6 
Then,   Muktãnand   Swãmi   and   Gopãlãnand   Swãmi   attempted   to 
answer  these  questions  to  the  best  of  their  ability,  but  neither  of 
them  was  able  to  give  a  satisfactory  reply.    So,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said, 
“When water goes into a fountain, it first revolves in a spiral and then 
spurts  upwards;  in  the  same  way,  the vrutti of  the jeev revolves  in  a 
spiral  in  the antah-karans,  which  acts  like  the  fountain,  and  then 
spurts  out  through  the  five indriyas.    A yogi does  this  in  two  ways:  
With  one vrutti,  he  thinks  of Shree  Vãsudev  Bhagvãn who  resides  in 
his  heart  as  a  witness.   With  the  second vrutti he  faces  outwards 
through  his  eyes,  and  he  thinks  about Bhagvãn who  is  outside.    He 
thinks of the whole murti from head to toe; he does not only think of 
a  single  part  of  the  body.    Just  as  when  a  person  looks  at  a  large 
mandir, he sees it completely as a whole; or when a person looks at a 
large  mountain,  he  sees  it  totally;  similarly,  the yogi sees Bhagvãn’s 
murti in  the  same  way,  but  he  does  not  see  each  part  of Bhagvãn’s 
body separately. 
 
4.7 
“When he observes the murti at a distance through his eyes, if he sees 
some  other  object  besides Bhagvãn,  then  he  draws  that murti of 
Bhagvãn closer  and  observes  it  at  the  tip  of  his  nose.    Even  after 
doing  this,  if  he  still  sees  some  object  nearby,  then  he  observes  the 
murti of Bhagvãn between his eyebrows.  While doing this, if he feels 
lazy  or  sleepy,  then  he  would  again  observe  the murti of Bhagvãn 
before  his  eyes.    Then,  in  the  same  way  that  a  child  flies  a  kite,  he 
would  fly  a  kite  (Bhagvãn’s murti)  with  a  string  (vrutti).    He  would 
make  it  rise  upwards,  then  bring  it  down  again,  and  then  make  it 
sweep from side to side.  Using his yogic powers in this way, when he 
becomes  alert,  he  would  again  observe  the murti at  the  tip  of  his 
nose,  and  from  there  he  would  bring  it  between  his  eyebrows,  and 
then he would draw it into his heart.  Then, he would merge together 
both the murti of Bhagvãn that resides in his heart as a witness, and 
the murti of Bhagvãn that is outside.  At this point, the two vruttis of 
the antah-karans become one. 

VADTÃL 
- 606 - 
4.8 
“While doing this, if he feels lazy or sleepy again, then he would bring 
the murti outside  again  using  the  two  types  of vruttis.    In  the  same 
way as with his eyes, he would use his ears, hands, tongue, and nose 
to perfect yog.  Also, he would observe Bhagvãn’s murti with his man, 
buddhi, chitt,  and ahankãr.    Then,  by  using  the sãnkhya thought 
process,  he  would  distinguish  himself  from  his indriyas and antah-
karans and would observe only the murti of Bhagvãn in his chaitanya.  
While  he  is  beholding  the  form,  whether  it  be  inside  or  outside,  if 
some  disturbance  regarding  worldly  affairs  obstructs  him,  then  he 
would  remove  the  problem  while  continuing  to  observe  the murti; 
but,   he   would   not   abandon   his yogic activities   because   of   the 
disturbance.  This is how a yogi with such yogic powers behaves.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 4 || 204 || 
 
 
Vadtãl – 5 
A Bhakta Should Not Perceive Mãyã In Bhagvãn 
 
5.1
 In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Mãgshar vad 4,  [29
th
 December  1825], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  facing  north  on  a 
decorated  seat  under  a  mango  tree  along  the  banks  of  Lake  Gomti, 
north  of  the mandir of Shree  Lakshmi-Nãrãyan in  Vadtãl.    He  was 
dressed entirely in extremely fine, white clothes, and He had several 
garlands  of  roses  hanging  around  His  neck.    Bunches  of  two  large 
roses  had  been  placed  upon  His  ears,  and  tassels  of  roses  decorated 
His pãgh.    A sabhã of  all  the munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
5.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Please ask complex questions in order to 
relieve everyone’s tiredness.”  Having said that, Mahãrãj put a pillow 
facing west and lay down. 
 
5.3 
Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Shree Krishna Bhagvãn has said:  
 

VADTÃL 
- 607 - 
daivee hyeshã guna-mayee mama mãyã duratyayã 
mãm-eva ye prapadyante mãyãm-etãm taranti te 
 
 “This verse means, ‘A person who attains me will break through my 
Mãyã, which is composed of the three gun, and which cannot otherwise 
be broken through even by suffering hardships’.  However, even after a 
person  has  attained Bhagvãn,  he  is  still  disturbed  by  thoughts  and 
desires  in  his  heart  during  the  worship  of Bhagvãn.    What  else, 
besides Mãyã, could be causing this?  That is the question.” 
 
5.4 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  sat  upright  from  His  lying  posture,  and  with  great 
compassion said, “Of the three gun of Mãyã, tamo-gun is predominant 
in the five bhuts, and the five tan-mãtras; rajo-gun is predominant in 
the   ten indriyas,   the buddhi,   and   the prãns; and sattva-gun is 
predominant  in  the man and  the  presiding devs of  the indriyas and 
antah-karans.    In  the  past,  all  those  who  have  become bhaktas have 
possessed the products of the three gun – the bhuts, the indriyas, the 
antah-karans, and their presiding devs.  Therefore, the answer to the 
question is as follows:  A person who has the firm belief of Bhagvãn – 
who  has  realised Bhagvãn completely  by  believing  that  there  are  no 
mãyik qualities in His svarup, and that Bhagvãn is greater than Mãyã 
and   the   products   of Mãyã (the   three gun) – has   gone   beyond 
Bhagvãn’s Mãyã.  Even though he has the products of the gun of mãyã 
within   him   (the bhuts,  the indriyas,   the antah-karans,   and   their 
presiding devs,  each  of  which  carries  out  its  respective  activities)  he 
is  still  said  to  have  gone  beyond Mãyã.    This is  because  even  though 
the   products   of Mãyã are   within   him,   he   still   realises   that   the 
pratyaksha  svarup of Shree  Vãsudev  Bhagvãn,  who  is  worthy  to  be 
worshipped by him, is beyond the gun of Mãyã; therefore, he himself 
should also be known to have gone beyond Mãyã. 
 
5.5 
“Even the shãstras acknowledge that the gun seem to have influenced 
all,  including  the devs and  the rushis.    Does  that  imply  that  they 
cannot  be  called muktas?    Also,  does  that  imply  that  they  cannot  be 
said to have gone beyond Mãyã?  In fact, they are all muktas, and they 

VADTÃL 
- 608 - 
have  all  gone  beyond Mãyã.    If  we  do  not  answer  in  this  way  then 
there is no other possible solution to that question.  Therefore, this is 
the only answer.” 
 
5.6 
Then, Nityãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, people go to seek the refuge 
of Bhagvãn.  Then, what are the characteristics of having the refuge of 
Bhagvãn?” 
 
5.7 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Bhagvãn has said in the Geetã,  
 
sarva-dharmãn-parityajya mãm-ekam sharanam vraja 
aham tvã sarva-pãpebhyo mokshayishyãmi mã shuchaha 
 
 “In  this  verse  he  says, ‘Abandon  all  other  forms  of  dharma  and 
surrender only to me.  I shall deliver you from all sins, so do not grieve’.  
A  person  who  has  such  a  firm  refuge  of Bhagvãn,  even  if he  were  to 
experience  pain  equivalent  to  that  of  final  destruction,  he  would  not 
believe  anyone  else  to  be  his  guardian  against  such  misery,  except 
Bhagvãn.    Moreover,  whatever  happiness  he  wishes  for,  he  seeks  to 
attain only from Bhagvãn.  He does not consider anyone but Bhagvãn 
to be the source of happiness.  Moreover, he behaves only according 
to the wishes of Bhagvãn.  Such a person can be known to have taken 
refuge  in Bhagvãn.    It  is  he  who  can  be  called  a  firm bhakta of 
Bhagvãn.” 
 
5.8 
Then, Nãjã Bhakta asked, “How can a person recognise someone who, 
when he speaks, shows that he has nishchay in Bhagvãn like that of a 
bhakta, but does not truly have the total refuge of Bhagvãn?” 
 
5.9 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Only after staying together and working 
together  can  a  person  recognise  the  strength  or  weakness  of  the 
nishchay of  a bhakta of Bhagvãn.    A  person  who  has  little nishchay 
would  become  distressed  and  find  a  path  out  of satsang.    He  would 
seek privacy where he could engage in worship to his capacity, but he 
would  not  be  able  to  tolerate  the  pressures  of  living  in  the  company 

VADTÃL 
- 609 - 
of bhaktas.    Therefore,  refuge  of Bhagvãn is  of  three  levels:   uttam, 
madhyam,   and kanishth.      Due   to   this,   there   are   three   levels   of 
bhaktas.” 
 
5.10 
Then, Nityãnand Swãmi asked, “Can  a bhakta who  is  of  the kanishth 
level eradicate his deficiency and become a bhakta of the uttam level 
in this very life, or not?” 
 
5.11 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Just as a bhakta performs the mãnsi pujã of 
Bhagvãn,  a person should  also  performs  the mãnsi pujã of  the uttam 
bhakta along  with Bhagvãn,  by  offering  him  the prasãd of Bhagvãn; 
and just as a bhakta prepares a thãl for Bhagvãn, a person should also 
prepare  a thãl for Bhagvãn’s uttam bhakta and  serve  it  to  him;  and 
just as a bhakta donates five rupees to Bhagvãn, a person should also 
donates  money  to  the  great sant.    Then,  by  performing sevã of 
Bhagvãn and  His sant,  who  possesses  the  highest  qualities,  with 
extreme  love – even  if  he  is  a bhakta of  the kanishth type  and  was 
destined  to  become  a bhakta of  the  highest  type  after  two  lives,  or 
after  four  lives,  or  after  ten  lives,  or  after  a  hundred  lives – he  will 
become  a bhakta of  the uttam level  in  this  very  life.    These  are  the 
rewards of the sevã of Bhagvãn and His bhaktas.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 5 || 205 || 
 
 
Vadtãl – 6 
The Jeev Remains Within Mãyã After Destruction 
 
6.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Mãgshar vad 11  [4
th
 January  1826], 
Swãmi Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a platform in front 
of  the mandir of Shree  Lakshmi-Nãrãyan in  Vadtãl.    He  was  dressed 
entirely  in  white  clothes.    Garlands  of  flowers  had  been  placed 
around  His  neck,  and  tassels  of  flowers  were  also  hanging  from  His 

VADTÃL 
- 610 - 
pãgh.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places, 
had gathered before Him. 
 
6.2 
Then,    Chiman-Rãvji  asked,  “Mahãrãj,  initially,  at  the  time  of 
destruction,  the jeevs with  their kãran bodies  were  absorbed  within 
Mãyã.  Then, at the time of creation, the jeevs attained their sthul and 
sukshma bodies.    Also,  a  variety  of  life  (devs,  humans,  animals,  and 
plants)  was  created.    Was  this  due  to karmas?    Or  was  it  due  to 
Bhagvãn’s wish?  If we say that it was due to karmas, then that would 
prove  the  Jain  philosophy  to  be  true.    On  the  other  hand,  if  we  say 
that it was due to Bhagvãn’s wish, then it would suggest that Bhagvãn 
is  biased  and  not  compassionate.    Therefore,  please  grace  us  by 
telling us how things really are.” 
 
6.3 
Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “You have not been able to ask the question 
properly.    The sthul and sukshma bodies  are  both  closely  associated 
with the kãran body in the same way that a tree is closely associated 
with  its  seed.    That  is  why  it  is  called  the kãran body.    This kãran 
body  is  a  form  of avidyã;  it  is  without  a  beginning;  and  it  retains  its 
sanchit karmas.      Just   as   a   seed   and   its   shell   have   an   eternal 
relationship,    and    just    as pruthvi and    smell    have    an    eternal 
relationship,  similarly,  the jeev and  the kãran body  have  an  eternal 
relationship.      Just   as   when   planted   seeds   sprout   upwards   after 
coming into  contact  with  rainwater,  similarly,  during  the  period  of 
creation,  the jeevs,  which  had  resided  within Mãyã together  with 
their kãran bodies,  attain  various  types  of  bodies  according  to  their 
individual karmas by the will of Bhagvãn, the giver of the rewards of 
karmas. 
 
6.4
 “However, the Jains, who are nãstiks,  claim  that  only karmas are  the 
cause  of  this,  but  they  do  not  describe Bhagvãn as  the  giver  of  the 
fruits  of karmas.    However,  in  reality,  this  belief  of  those nãstiks is 
wrong.    Therefore, if  someone  claims  that kãl is  the  only  influencing 
force,  then  he  is  not  correct;  or,  if  someone  claims  that karma is  the 

VADTÃL 
- 611 - 
only  influencing  force,  then  he  is  not  correct;  or,  if  someone  claims 
that Bhagvãn’s wish is the only influencing force, then even he is not 
correct.  The shãstras would describe the predominance of whichever 
influence is predominant at that time; but that same influence should 
not be accepted for all situations. 
 
6.5 
“This is because after the world was created, in  the  first Satya-Yug, 
everyone’s wishes came true, all were brãhmans,  and  a  child  would 
be  born  merely  by  mentally  wishing  for  one.    There  was  a kalpa-
vruksh in  every  home,  and  all  people  worshipped  only Bhagvãn.  
Then,  with  the  arrival  of Tretã-Yug,  people’s wishes were no longer 
fulfilled;  only  when  a  person  went  and  stood  under  a kalpa-vruksh 
did  his  wishes  become  fulfilled;  and  only  after  touching  a  woman 
would   a   child   be   conceived.      Then,   when Dvãpar-Yug arrived, 
children  were  born  only  after  physical association  with  a  woman.  
However, the ways of Satya-Yug and Tretã-Yug are not to be found in 
all Satya-Yugs and Tretã-Yugs;  they  were  found  only  in  the  first 
Satya-Yug and the first Tretã-Yug. 
 
6.6 
“Therefore,  when  there  is  the  predominance  of  pleasant kãl,   it 
diminishes  the  power  of  the  impure karmas of  the jeevs.    However, 
when  a  terrible  famine  strikes,  everyone  suffers;  or  when  there  is  a 
horrendous war, hundreds of thousands of people are killed at once.  
In these cases were everyone’s pleasant karmas suddenly used up at 
the same time?  Instead, it is the intense power of unpleasant kãl that 
overcomes the force of the pleasant karmas of the jeevs.  So, when the 
influence of intense kãl prevails, karmas have no influence; due to the 
influence  of kãl, karmas that  should  have  resulted  in  happiness  lead 
to  misery,  and karmas that  should  have  resulted  in  long  life  lead  to 
death.    In  this  way,  when  the  influence  of  a  strong kãl is  prevalent, 
everything occurs due to kãl.  This is mentioned in the shãstras. 
 
6.7 
“However, when many people become ekãntik bhaktas of Bhagvãn, 
then Satya-Yug prevails even in Kali-Yug.  In these circumstances, the 

VADTÃL 
- 612 - 
shãstras describe the strength of the pleasant karmas that result from 
the ekãntik bhaktas performing bhakti of Bhagvãn, but the strength of 
kãl is not mentioned. 
 
6.8 
“Without  understanding  this  principle,  those  who  believe  in  the 
nãstik philosophy   describes that   only karmas are   the   cause   of 
everything;  but,  they  do  not  realise  that  the  principle  is  in  reference 
to   the   strength   of   the karmas of ekãntik bhaktas of Bhagvãn.  
However, karmas of vimukhs are  not  said  to  have  such  strength.  
When Bhagvãn takes birth with the wish, ‘During this lifespan, I wish 
to grant kalyãn to all jeevs, both worthy and unworthy, who come into 
contact  with  my  murti’,   then kãl and karma have   no   influence 
whatsoever.    At  that  time,  only Bhagvãn’s influence  prevails.    When 
Bhagvãn assumed the avatar of Krishna, the evil Putnã tried to poison 
Bhagvãn;  still, Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn gave  her  the  same fate  as  His 
mother  Yashodã.    There  were  other  evil  demons  that  came  to  kill 
Bhagvãn;  but,  even  they  were  granted Akshardhãm by Shree  Krishna 
Bhagvãn.    Others  were  also  granted kalyãn according  to  the  feelings 
by   which   they   were   associated   with Shree   Krishna   Bhagvãn.  
Therefore,  in  those  instances,  only Bhagvãn’s influence  is  said  to  be 
prevalent,  but  neither kãl nor karma is  said  to  have  any  influences.  
Therefore,  a  person  should  interpret  situations  according  to  the 
circumstances in which they occur.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 6 || 206 || 
 
 
Vadtãl – 7 
The Characteristics Of Religious And Demonic People 
 
7.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Mãgshar vad 14  [7
th
 January  1826], 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  platform  in  front  of  the mandir of 
Shree Lakshmi-Nãrãyan in  Vadtãl.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various 
places, had gathered before Him. 

VADTÃL 
- 613 - 
7.2 
In   the sabhã,   the bhaktas were   talking   about Bhagvãn amongst 
themselves, when the topic arose that there are two types of people:  
religious  and  demonic.    Of  these,  religious  people  always  become 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn,   whereas   the   demonic   will   always   remain 
opposed to Bhagvãn. 
 
7.3 
Then,   Chiman-Rãvji  asked  a  question:    “Mahãrãj  is  there  any 
possibility of a demonic person becoming religious?” 
 
7.4 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A demonic person most certainly does not 
become  religious.    This  is  because  he  has  a  demonic  nature  from 
birth.  If such a person somehow enters satsang, he still does not lose 
his  demonic  nature.    Then,  when  he  leaves  his  physical  body  after 
staying  in satsang,  he  is  absorbed  into brahm and  then  emerges  out 
again.    Only  after  he  does  so  countless  times  is  his  demonic  nature 
destroyed; otherwise, it is not destroyed.” 
 
7.5 
Then, Shobhã-Rãm Shãstri asked, “Mahãrãj, what is Bhagvãn’s anvay 
nature, and what is His vyatirek nature?” 
 
7.6 
Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “The principle of anvay-vyatirek is not that 
Bhagvãn has become half anvay within Mãyã and half vyatirek svarup 
His dhãm.    Instead, Bhagvãn’s svarup is  such  that He  is anvay within 
Mãyã, and  at  the  same  time,  He  is vyatirek.   Bhagvãn is  not  afraid, 
‘What  if  I  enter  Mãyã  and  then become impure?’  Instead,  when 
Bhagvãn associates with Mãyã, even Mãyã becomes like Akshardhãm; 
and  if  He  associates  with  the  twenty-four tattvas,  then  they  also 
become brahm-rup.  Therefore, the Shreemad Bhãgvat states: 
 
dhãmnã svena sadã nirasta-kuhakam satyam param dheemahi 
We perform dhyãn upon Bhagvãn, who destroyed the deception via His own 
svarup, in the form of the products of Mãyã.  This is the supremely satya 
svarup of Bhagvãn. 
 
“In this way, there are countless such statements which describe 
Bhagvãn’s svarup. 

VADTÃL 
- 614 - 
7.7 
“For example, there is ãkãsh in  the  seed  of  a  tree;  and  when  a  tree 
grows   from that   seed, ãkãsh will   still   remain   within   all   of   its 
branches,  leaves,  flowers,  and  fruits  in  its anvay form.    However, 
when the tree is cut, ãkãsh is not cut along with it; and when the tree 
is  burnt, ãkãsh is  not  burnt.    In  the  same  way, Bhagvãn is anvay 
within Mãyã and the entities that have evolved from it; but, He is also 
vyatirek from  it  just  like ãkãsh.    This  is  the anvay-vyatirek nature  of 
Bhagvãn’s svarup.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 7 || 207 || 
 
 
Vadtãl – 8 
Becoming Like Bhagvãn 
A Spider’s Web 
 
8.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Posh sud 4  [12
th
 January  1826],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  platform  in  front  of  the 
mandir of Shree Lakshmi-Nãrãyan in Vadtãl.  He was dressed entirely 
in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
8.2 
In the sabhã, Shreeji Mahãrãj was sitting in a meditative posture and 
thinking.        Some    of    the munis were    singing kirtans to    the 
accompaniment of a dukad and sarodã.  He gave darshan in this way 
for a short while.  Then, He opened His eyes and said, “Everyone 
please  listen  as  I  wish  to  speak  to  you.    The vrutti of  these  eyes  is 
formless;  but,  if  some  solid  object  comes  in  its  way,  that vrutti is 
obstructed.      Therefore,   that vrutti is   actually physical   and   is 
composed  predominantly  of  the tattva of pruthvi.   When  a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn fixes  that vrutti on Bhagvãn’s murti,  the vrutti initially 
appears  like  a  thin  yellow  rope.    Just  as  a  spider  stretches  its  web 
from  one  pillar  to  another,  and  then sometimes  goes  to  one  pillar, 
then  to  the  other  pillar,  or  sometimes  sits  between  the  two  pillars, 

VADTÃL 
- 615 - 
similarly,  the jeev is  like  the  spider; Bhagvãn’s murti is  one  of  the 
pillars, the antah-karans are the other pillar, and the vrutti is the web.  
Through that vrutti, a meditating yogi sometimes becomes absorbed 
in Bhagvãn’s murti;  at  times,  he  stays  within  his  own antah-karans; 
and at other times, he stays between his antah-karans and Bhagvãn. 
 
8.3 
“While  doing  this,  when  the  yellow vrutti,   which   is   composed 
predominantly of the tattva of pruthvi, becomes predominantly jal, it 
appears  to  be  white;  when  it  becomes  predominantly tej,  it  appears 
to  be  red;  when  it  becomes  predominantly vãyu,  it  appears  to  be 
green;  and  when  it  becomes  predominantly ãkãsh,  it  appears  to  be 
dark.    Finally,  when  the vrutti sheds  the  predominance  of  the  five 
bhuts and  becomes nirgun,  it  appears  to  be  extremely  radiant  and 
assumes the svarup of Bhagvãn. 
 
8.4 
“Therefore, a person who tries to maintain his vrutti on Bhagvãn’s 
svarup in this way should remain perfectly pure.  For example, when 
a  person  wishes  to  offer pujã to  a dev,  the dev accepts  the pujã only 
after the person becomes as pure as the dev.  Similarly, a person who 
keeps his vrutti on Bhagvãn’s svarup should realise his own self to be 
distinct   from   the   three   bodies   (sthul, sukshma,   and kãran),   in 
accordance with the method prescribed in the Sãnkhya shãstras; and 
only   after   attaining ãtmã-nishthã,   should   he   fix   his vrutti on 
Bhagvãn’s svarup.    While  repeatedly  fixing  his vrutti in  this  way, 
when  his vrutti is  eventually  absorbed  into Bhagvãn’s svarup,  that 
state  has  been  defined  as  sleep  for  a yogi performing dhyãn;  but,  a 
yogi’s sleep is never like the state sushupti.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 8 || 208 || 
 
 
Vadtãl – 9 
How Can A Person Experience The Nirgun Bliss Of Bhagvãn? 
 
9.1 
In  the Samvat year 1882,  on Posh sud 8  [16
th
 January  1826],  Swãmi 
Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   mattress   with   a 

VADTÃL 
- 616 - 
cylindrical  pillow  that  had  been placed  on  a  platform  in  front  of  the 
mandir of Shree Lakshmi-Nãrãyan in Vadtãl.  He was dressed entirely 
in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
9.2 
Then,   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   asked   the munis, “Just  as  a  person  can 
experience  the  three  kinds  of mãyik pleasures – rãjas, tãmasi,  and 
sãttvik – in the three mental states, how can he experience the nirgun 
bliss of Bhagvãn?” 
 
9.3 
All  the munis conferred  amongst  themselves  in  order  to  answer  the 
question, but they were unable to do so satisfactorily. 
 
9.4 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Suppose there is ãkãsh alone,  without 
the other four bhuts.  Also, suppose that in that ãkãsh there are many 
moons  as  there  are  stars.    Then,  the  intensity  of  that  light  would  be 
equal  to  the  intensity  of  the  divine  light  of Chidãkãsh.    The murti of 
Bhagvãn is always seated at the centre of that Chidãkãsh. 
 
9.5 
“When  a  person  attains samãdhi of   that   form,   then   even   if   he 
experiences  it  for  only  a  moment,  the  person  who  is  engaged  in 
worship  feels, ‘I have enjoyed the bliss of Bhagvãn in samãdhi for 
thousands of  years’.    This  is  how  a  person  experiences  the nirgun 
bliss  of Bhagvãn’s svarup.    On  the  other  hand,  even  if a  person 
indulges  in mãyik pleasures  for  a  long  time,  he  feels  as  if  it  was  just 
for  a  moment.    Therefore,  the nirgun bliss  of Bhagvãn is  eternal  and 
imperishable, whereas the mãyik pleasures are perishable.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 9 || 209 || 
 
 
Vadtãl – 10 
Realising Bhagvãn In The Svarup Of A King Or Sãdhu 
 
10.1 
In the Samvat year 1882, on Posh sud 11 [19
th
 January 1826],  Swãmi 
Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   mattress   with   a 

VADTÃL 
- 617 - 
cylindrical  pillow  which  had  been  placed  on  a  wooden  bedstead 
under the neem tree outside the mandir of Shree Lakshmi-Nãrãyan in 
Vadtãl.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of munis, 
as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
10.2 
Then, Bhagu-Bhãi Pãtidãr of the village Bhãdran arrived in the sabhã 
and asked, “Mahãrãj, how can the jeev attain kalyãn?” 
 
10.3 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Bhagvãn assumes an avatãr on this earth in 
one of two svarups: the svarup of the king, or in the svarup of a sãdhu.  
When  He  assumes  an avatãr upon  the  earth  in  the svarup of  a  king, 
He  possesses  the  thirty-nine  characteristics  of  a  king;  and  when  He 
assumes  an avatãr upon  the  earth  in  the svarup of  a sãdhu,  He 
possesses the thirty characteristics of a sãdhu. 
 
10.4 
“When Bhagvãn appears  in  the svarup a  king,  He  is  educated  in  the 
sixty-four  sciences,  arts,  and  skills  of  a  royal  household;  the  four 
methods  of  ruling    (reconciling  with  enemies,  suppressing  enemies, 
instigating divisions within enemies, and punishing enemies); as well 
as  the  nine  types  of  sentiments  and  emotions,  such  as  affection, 
humour, sadness, courage, and tranquillity.  However, when Bhagvãn 
appears   in   the svarup of   a sãdhu,   he   does   not   have   these 
characteristics.    When Bhagvãn is  in  the svarup of  a  king,  He  may 
even  take  to  hunting  to  survive  in  times  of  disaster.    He  may  punish 
thieves  by  strangling  them,  and  He  may  also  keep  many  women  in 
His  household.    However,  in  the svarup of  a sãdhu, Bhagvãn strictly 
follows  a  non-violent  lifestyle;  He  would  not  even  pluck  a  blade  of 
green  grass.    Also,  He  would  not  touch  even  wooden  statues  of 
women or paintings of women.  Therefore, the behaviour of Bhagvãn 
in  the svarup of  a sãdhu is  not  the  same  as  that  of Bhagvãn in  the 
svarup of a king. 
 
10.5 
“The thirty-nine characteristics of Bhagvãn’s avatãrs in the svarup of 
a king (Shree Krishna and Shree Rãm) are listed in the first skandh of 
the  Shreemad  Bhãgvat  through  the  discussion  between Pruthvi and 

VADTÃL 
- 618 - 
Dharma.  The thirty characteristics of Bhagvãn’s avatãrs in the svarup 
of a sãdhu (Dattãtrey and Kapil-Dev) are listed in the eleventh skandh 
through the discussion between Shree Krishna Bhagvãn and Uddhav. 
 
10.6 
“Therefore, a person who desires kalyãn should  recognise Bhagvãn 
through  these  characteristics  and  seek  refuge  of  that Bhagvãn.    He 
should have complete faith in Him, and He should perform His bhakti 
while following His ãgnã.  This is the only means of attaining kalyãn. 
 
10.7 
“However, when Bhagvãn is  not pratyaksha on  this earth,  a  person 
should seek the refuge of a sant who has the realisation of Bhagvãn – 
because  the jeev can  also  attain kalyãn through  him.    When  such  a 
sant is not present, He should keep firm faith in Bhagvãn’s murti and 
perform bhakti while  observing svadharma, as  this  can  also  grant 
kalyãn to the jeev.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 10 || 210 || 
 
 
Vadtãl – 11 
The Destruction Of The Jeev 
 
11.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Posh sud  Punam [23
rd
 January  1826], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress  with  a 
cylindrical pillow that had been placed on a wooden bedstead under 
the   neem   tree   outside   the mandir of Shree Lakshmi-Nãrãyan in 
Vadtãl.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    He  was  also 
wearing  garlands  of  white  flowers  around  His  neck.    In  addition  to 
this,  bunches  of  flowers  were  placed  above  His  ears,  and  tassels  of 
flowers were also hanging from His pãgh.  A sabhã of all the munis, as 
well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
11.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “My nature is such that I feel extremely 
afraid   of   harming   any   of   the   following:    Bhagvãn,   a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn, a brãhman, and a person who is humble.  Other than these 

VADTÃL 
- 619 - 
four,  I  am  afraid of  no  one.   This  is  because  even if  a  person  were  to 
harm  anyone  else,  his  body  would  be  destroyed;  the jeev would  not 
be destroyed.  However, if a person harms one of these four, then his 
jeev is also destroyed.” 
 
11.3 
Hearing his, Muktãnand Swãmi questioned, “Mahãrãj, the jeev is said 
to  be  indestructible.    Then,  what  should  one  understand  by  its 
‘destruction’?” 
 
11.4 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A jeev that  attains  a jad svarup,  such  as  the 
body   of   a   mountain,   will   never   attain kalyãn.      This   should   be 
understood as the ‘destruction’ of that jeev.    Therefore,  anyone  who 
seeks kalyãn should  never  harm Bhagvãn,  a bhakta of Bhagvãn,  a 
brãhman, and a person who is humble. 
 
11.5 
“Also, a person should never keep mãn of any sort before Bhagvãn or 
His bhakta.  This is because mãn is the cause of krodh, matsar, irshyã, 
and  slander.    In  fact,  even  the bhakti of  a  person with mãn is said  to 
be  demonic.    Moreover,  if  a  person  oppresses  a bhakta of Bhagvãn, 
then  even  if  he  himself  is  a bhakta,  he  should  be  known  to  be  a 
demon.  My nature is such that I hate even the sight of a person who 
harms  a brãhman,  a  humble  person,  or  a bhakta of Bhagvãn.    Such  a 
person  will  never  attain  my  company,  either  in  this lok or  in  other 
loks.” 
 
11.6 
Having  spoken  in  this  way,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  for  two kirtans to 
be sung.  The first was ‘Mãrã Harjishu Het Na Dise Re, Tene Gher Shid 
Jaiye...’ – why should a person even visit the home of a person who has 
no love for my lord?  The second was ‘Mãrã Vahãljishu Vãlap Dise Re, 
Teno Sang Kem Tajiye...’ – why should a person abandon the company 
of  a  person  who  has  love  for  my  lord?  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  gave  an 
ãgnã that  all satsangis should  learn  these  two kirtans, and added, “A 
person should constantly sing these two kirtans and remember their 
message.” 

VADTÃL 
- 620 - 
11.7 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  got  up  and  sat  on  a  platform  in  front  of  the 
mandir of Shree Lakshmi-Nãrãyan. 
 
11.8 
Gopãlãnand Swãmi then asked, “Why is it that despite reading the 
six-shãstras,  the  Purãns,  and  other shãstras,  the pandits of  the world 
still  do  not  understand  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn and  His sant as  it 
really is?” 
 
11.9 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Though such a person reads the shãstras 
the  Purãns,  he  does  not  have  the  refuge  of Bhagvãn.    Therefore,  his 
jeev has  been  overpowered  by  inner  enemies,  such  as kãm, krodh, 
lobh, irshyã,  and matsar.    These  inner  enemies  never  allow  him  to 
even raise his head.  As a result, the pandits perceive Bhagvãn and His 
sant to be just like themselves.  They think, ‘Just as the inner enemies 
of  within  us  are  never  eradicated,  similarly,  the  same  enemies  are 
probably not eradicated from them either’.  In this way, they perceive 
faults  in Bhagvãn and  His sant.    So,  even  though  they  read  the 
shãstras and Purãns, they fail to realise the greatness of Bhagvãn and 
His sant as it really is.” 
 
11.10 
Next, Shreeji Mahãrãj posed a question to Dinã-Nãth Bhatt and all the 
munis:  “The sat-purush,  who  is brahm-svarup,  behaves  above  the 
three  bodies  and  the  three  mental  states.    Also,  he  does not  believe 
any of the actions of the fourteen indriyas to affect him.  However, an 
ignorant  person  cannot  realise  this.    Only  when  he  attains  a sthiti 
similar  to  that  of  the sat-purush does  he  behave  like  the sat-purush, 
and  only  then  does  he  understand  the  great sant’s behaviour.    So,  as 
long  as  a  person  has  not  realised  the  greatness  of  the sat-purush,  he 
does  not  attain  the sthiti of  being brahm-svarup.    However,  without 
ãtmã-nishthã, a person cannot realise the greatness of the sat-purush.  
Therefore, there  seems  to  be  a  paradox.    Now,  please  example  how 
this paradox can be resolved?” 
 
11.11 
Everyone attempted to answer to the best of their ability, but no one 
was able to give a solution to the question. 

VADTÃL 
- 621 - 
11.12 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Here, allow me to answer.  The answer is 
that when a person develops intense love for a sant who has realised 
the avatãr of Bhagvãn on this earth, he then never perceives any kind 
of avgun in  the sat-purush.    For  example,  when  someone  has  strong 
love for someone, he will never see that person’s avgun,  and  he  will 
always believe the person’s words.  This is natural on the worldly 
path  and  it  is  also  natural  on  the  path  of kalyãn.    Therefore,  intense 
love for the sat-purush is the only means to realising a person’s ãtmã; 
it is the only means to realising the greatness of the sat-purush; and it 
is also the only means to having the direct darshan of Bhagvãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 11 || 211 || 
 
 
Vadtãl – 12 
The Rise And Fall Of The Jeev 
 
12.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Posh vad 2  [25
th
 January  1826],  Swãmi 
Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a decorated bedstead with 
a  cylindrical  pillow  on  a  wooden  platform  under  the  neem  tree 
outside  the mandir of Shree  Lakshmi-Nãrãyan in  Vadtãl.    He  was 
wearing   a   white khes,   and   had   covered   Himself   with   a   white 
pachhedi, over which He had wrapped a rose-coloured shawl.  He had 
tied  a  white pãgh around  His  head  and  was  wearing  a  garland  of 
roses around His neck.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
12.2 
In  the sabhã,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  sat  thinking  for  quite  some  time.    He 
then  opened  His  eyes  and  looked  compassionately  at  the sabhã of 
bhaktas, and said, “Today, I wish to talk to all of you about nishchay in 
Bhagvãn,  so  please  listen  carefully.   Shree  Purushottam  Bhagvãn, 
whose svarup is  forever divya,  is  seated  in Akshardhãm,  which  is  as 
luminous  as  countless  millions  of  suns,  moons,  and  flames  of  fire.  
That  same Bhagvãn assumes  the avatãrs of Rãm and Krishna,  upon 
this earth for the sake of granting kalyãn to the jeevs.  Then, the jeev 

VADTÃL 
- 622 - 
that develops firm nishchay in that Bhagvãn by great association with 
a sant,  progresses  spiritually  day  by  day,  just  like  the  waxing  moon 
on the second day of the bright half of the lunar month.  As the sun’s 
effect on the moon increases, the waxing moon continues increasing.  
Then, when Punam finally arrives, the moon becomes full.  Similarly, 
before developing total nishchay in Bhagvãn, the jeev is as dim as the 
new  moon  of Amãs – only  as  bright  as  a  glow-worm.    Then,  as  a 
person  develops nishchay coupled  with  the  knowledge  of Bhagvãn’s 
greatness, his jeevãtmã progresses and becomes like the full moon of 
Punam.  Then, his indriyas and antah-karans are no longer capable of 
dislodging him from his nishchay.  Regardless of the type of charitras 
Bhagvãn performs,  he  does  not  perceive  any  fault  in Bhagvãn.    In 
addition,  a  person  who  has nishchay in Bhagvãn coupled  with  the 
knowledge of His greatness becomes a brave bhakta. 
 
12.3 
“However,  if  at  some  time  that  same bhakta has  doubts  in  the 
charitras of Bhagvãn, either by the influence of unpleasant kãl, kriyã, 
sang, dhyãn, mantra, dikshã,  and shãstra,  or  due  to  his  identification 
with  the  body,  then  his jeev,  which  was  like  a  full  moon  of Punam, 
becomes like the unlit moon of Amãs.  Therefore, some minor flaw in 
a person will not really harm the jeev very much; but, if he somehow 
doubts the charitras of Bhagvãn, or if he somehow develops a dislike 
for Bhagvãn,  then  that jeev instantly  falls  from  the  path  of kalyãn.  
Just  as  when  the  roots  of  a  tree  are  cut,  the  tree  automatically 
becomes dry, similarly, a jeev who perceives avgun in Bhagvãn in any 
way can never stay without falling from the satsang. 
 
12.4 
“Moreover, a person whose nishchay in Bhagvãn is  weak,  despite 
being in satsang, still doubts, ‘Who knows whether I will attain kalyãn 
or  not?    When  I  die, will  I become  a  dev?    Or  will  I  become  a  king?   Or 
will I become a ghost?’  A person who does not have absolute nishchay 
in Bhagvãn has  such  doubts.    However,  a  person  who  does  have 
absolute nishchay believes, ‘I have attained kalyãn ever since the day I 
attained  Bhagvãn.    In  fact,  whoever  has  my  darshan  or  listens  to  my 
talks will also be freed from all of his sins and will attain Akshardhãm’.  

VADTÃL 
- 623 - 
So,   maintaining   such nishchay coupled   with   the   knowledge   of 
Bhagvãn’s greatness, a person should believe himself to be fulfilled.  
All of you should constantly be aware of this fact.” 
 
12.5 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “Please  sing  the  following kirtans 
describing Bhagvãn’s greatness:    ‘Dhanya  Vrundãvan  Vãsi  Vat-Ni 
Chãyã Re Jyã Hari Bestã...’ – glorious are the shades of the banyan trees 
of Vrundãvan, where the lord often sat’.”  Then, the kirtan was sung. 
 
12.6 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “In the same way as the kirtan, Shree 
Krishna Bhagvãn has also said in the Shreemad Bhãgvat: 
 
aho amee devavarã-marãrchitam pãdãm-bujam te sumanah-falãrhanam 
naman-tyupãdãya shikhãbhir-ãtmanas-tamo-pahatyai taru-janma yat-krutam 
These trees – which are worshipped by the chief dev (Indra) and all the other 
devs – offer fruits and flowers at your holy feet, and bow before you with their 
hands (their branches and leaves) to remove their darkness of ignorance 
which caused their birth as trees. 
 
 “So, even a person who is born as a tree becomes fulfilled by being 
associated with Bhagvãn.  In fact, even the tree under which Bhagvãn 
has sat should be understood to be entitled to attain Akshardhãm. 
 
12.7 
“A person, who does not have such firm nishchay coupled  with  the 
knowledge  of Bhagvãn’s greatness in his heart, should be known to 
be  impotent – no jeev is  ever  going  to  be  saved  by  his  words.    For 
example,  a  king  who  is  impotent,  who  is about  to  lose  his  kingdom, 
and whose family line is about to end, will still not be able to conceive 
a son with his wife.  In fact, even if he summons other impotent men 
like  himself  from  his  entire  kingdom  and  allows  them  to  associate 
with  his  wife,  she  still  will  not  conceive  a  son.    Similarly,  no  one 
attains kalyãn by   hearing   even shãstras like   the   Geetã   and   the 
Shreemad  Bhãgvat  from  a  person  who  does  not  have nishchay in 
Bhagvãn coupled with the knowledge of His greatness.  Just as death 
is  certain  for whoever drinks sweetened milk into which a snake’s 
venom has fallen, similarly, no one can ever attain kalyãn by listening 

VADTÃL 
- 624 - 
to  the  Geetã  or  the  Shreemad  Bhãgvat  from  a  person  who  does  not 
have nishchay in Bhagvãn coupled   with   the   knowledge   of   His 
greatness; only harm can come from it.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 12 || 212 || 
 
 
Vadtãl – 13 
If Bhagvãn Pervades All, How Can He Possess A Svarup? 
 
13.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Posh vad 7  [30
th
 January  1826],  Swãmi 
Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   mattress   with   a 
cylindrical pillow that had been placed on a wooden bedstead under 
the   neem   tree   outside  the mandir of Shree   Lakshmi-Nãrãyan in 
Vadtãl.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes,  and  was  also 
wearing  garlands  of  white  flowers  around  His  neck.    In  addition  to 
this,  a  decorated  umbrella  with  a  golden,  egg-shaped  top-piece  had 
been placed above Him.  Shreeji Mahãrãj sat in such a charming way, 
tossing  a  pomegranate  in  His  hand.   A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
13.2 
Then,  Bhagu-Bhãi  Patidãr  of  Bhadran  approached  Shreeji  Mahãrãj, 
and asked, “Mahãrãj, how does samãdhi actually occur?” 
 
13.3 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “Bhagvãn assumes  an avatãr in Bharat-
Khand for  the kalyãn of jeevs.    When  He  appears  in  the svarup of  a 
king, he possesses the thirty-nine characteristics of a king; and when 
he appears in the svarup of a sãdhu, such as Dattãtrey or Kapil-Dev, he 
possesses   the   thirty   characteristics   of   a sãdhu.      By   appearance, 
Bhagvãn’s svarup appears similar to that of any human; however, it is 
an exceptionally divya svarup.  For example, a magnetic rock appears 
similar  to  all  the  other  rocks  on  the  earth.    However,  there  is  an 
intrinsic magical property in it.  When a ship sails past a mountain of 
magnetic  rock,  all  the  iron  nails  of  the  ship  are  drawn  towards  the 
magnetic  rock.    Similarly,  when  a  person  does darshan of Bhagvãn’s 

VADTÃL 
- 625 - 
svarup with shraddhã,  be  it  the svarup of  a  king  or  the svarup of  a 
sãdhu,  his indriyas are  drawn  towards Bhagvãn.    Then,  he  attains 
samãdhi.   
 
13.4 
“Upon having the darshan of Shree Krishna Bhagvãn, all the residents 
of  Gokul  attained samãdhi;  and  in  that samãdhi, Bhagvãn showed 
them  His  own dhãm.    In  this  way,  whenever  there  is  an avatãr of 
Bhagvãn,  then  at  that  time, Bhagvãn’s svarup definitely  possesses 
certain  magical  powers.    Moreover,  all  the indriyas of  anyone  who 
does darshan of Bhagvãn with shraddhã are drawn towards Bhagvãn, 
and he instantly enters samãdhi.  At the same time, if Bhagvãn wishes 
to  attract  many  people  towards  Him,  then  even  people  who  are  not 
bhaktas, and even animals, attain samãdhi upon seeing Him.  So, what 
is so surprising about this happening to a bhakta of Bhagvãn?” 
 
13.5 
Then,  Muktãnand  Swãmi  asked, “It  is  generally  said that Brahm 
pervades  everywhere.    But,  how  can  something  that  is  pervasive  be 
said  to  possess  a svarup?    Also,  how  can  something  that  possesses  a 
svarup be called pervasive?  That is my question.” 
 
13.6 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Brahm resides  in  only  one  place,  but  not 
everywhere.  That Brahm is Shree Krishna Bhagvãn; He is in all places 
while  still  residing  in  only  one  place.    For  example,  when  a  person 
worships Surya, he grants the person a vision like his own.  Then, that 
person  can  see  as  far  as Surya’s vision  reaches.    Also,  a  person  who 
has  attained siddh-dashã can  hear  people  who  may  be  thousands  of 
millions of miles away as if they are speaking next to him.  In fact, he 
is able to pick up an object that may be millions of miles away, even 
though his arms are the same size as any other human’s.  Similarly, 
when Shree Krishna Bhagvãn wishes to give darshan somewhere, He 
gives His darshan there while still residing in one place.  Even though 
He has only one svarup, He appears in countless svarups.  In fact, if a 
person who is a yogi has extraordinary powers such as long-distance 
hearing  and  long-distance  vision,  then  what  is  so  surprising  about 
Bhagvãn also possessing such powers? 

VADTÃL 
- 626 - 
13.7 
“So, even though the shãstras describe Bhagvãn as  pervasive,  He 
actually   possesses   a   definite svarup.      In   those shãstras,   He   is 
described  as  pervasive  in  the  sense  that  using  His  own  powers,  He 
gives His darshan to all while still residing in one place.  But, He is not 
pervasive  in  the  sense  of  being nirãkãr like ãkãsh.    So,  in  reality, 
Bhagvãn eternally  possesses  a svarup.    It  is  that Bhagvãn with  a 
definite svarup,  who  appears  in  countless  millions  of brahmãnds 
while always residing in Akshardhãm.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 13 || 213 || 
 
 
Vadtãl – 14 
Even A Sinner Becomes Pure In The Refuge Of A Sat-Purush 
 
14.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Posh vad 9  [1
st
 February  1826],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  in  front  of  the mandir of 
Shree Lakshmi-Nãrãyan in  Vadtãl.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from various places, 
had gathered before Him. 
 
14.2 
Then,  Rãm-Chandra Vãghmodiã of Vadodarã asked, “Mahãrãj, why 
does  a  person  who  seems  to  be  an  unworthy  person  still  attain 
samãdhi?” 
 
14.3 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “Everyone  believes  that  a  person  who 
disobeys  the dharma of  his varna and ãshram as  prescribed  in  the 
shãstras is an ‘unworthy person’.  However, if that unworthy person 
sincerely appreciates the qualities of Bhagvãn and His sant, he earns 
great  rewards.    As  a  result,  the  sins  that  he  had  committed  by 
disobeying  the dharma of  his varna and ãshram are  eradicated,  and 
his jeev becomes  extremely  pure.    Then,  when  his  mind  is  fixed  on 
Bhagvãn’s svarup, he attains samãdhi. 

VADTÃL 
- 627 - 
14.4 
“Moreover, when a person abides by the dharma of  his varna and 
ãshram as  prescribed  in  the  Dharma-Shãstras,  everyone  considers 
that person to be someone who is sincere in his dharma.  However, if 
he  criticises Bhagvãn or  His sant,  then  the  result  of  committing  the 
sin  of  criticising  a sat-purush is  such  that  all  the  rewards earned  by 
abiding  to  the dharma of  his varna and ãshram are  burnt  to  ashes.  
So,  a  person  who  criticises  a sat-purush is  a  worse  sinner  than  a 
person  who  has  committed  the  five  great  sins.    This  is  because  he 
who has committed one of the five great sins can be redeemed of the 
sin  by  seeking  the  refuge  of  a sat-purush;  but  there  are  no  means  to 
be  redeemed  for  a  person  who  has  criticised  a sat-purush.    This  is 
because  when  a  person  goes  to  a  place  of  pilgrimage,  he  is  freed  of 
the  sins  he  has  committed  elsewhere;  but  the  sins  committed  at  a 
place  of  pilgrimage  are  totally  irredeemable – it  is  as  if  they  are 
etched in iron. 
 
14.5 
“Therefore, by seeking the refuge of a sat-purush,  regardless  of  how 
terrible  a  sinner    a  person  may  be,  he  becomes  extremely  pure and 
attains samãdhi.    On  the  other  hand,  a  person  who  criticises  a sat-
purush is  still  a  terrible  sinner,  regardless  of  how  sincere  he  may 
seem  to  be  in  abiding  by dharma.    Moreover,  he  can  never  have  the 
darshan of Bhagvãn in   his   heart.      Therefore,   whom   a vimukh 
considers to be a sinner is not a sinner, and whom he considers to be 
sincere in his dharma is not really sincere.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 14 || 214 || 
 
 
Vadtãl – 15 
Religious And Demonic Jeevs 
 
15.1 
In the Samvat year 1882, on Posh vad 11 [3
rd
 February 1826], Swãmi 
Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   mattress   with   a 
cylindrical pillow that had been placed on a platform under the neem 
tree  in  front  of  the mandir of Shree Lakshmi-Nãrãyan in  Vadtãl.    He 

VADTÃL 
- 628 - 
was  wearing  a dagli and  a survãl made  of kinkhãb.    A  rich,  orange 
shelu with  wide,  golden  edges  had  been  tied  around  His  head,  and 
another  orange shelu with  very  wide,  golden  edges  rested  upon  His 
shoulder.    In  addition  to  this,  a  decorated  umbrella  with  a  golden, 
egg-shaped top-piece had been placed above Him.  A sabhã of munis, 
as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
15.2 
Then, Shobhã-Rãm Shãstri asked a question:  “Mahãrãj, there are two 
types  of jeevs:    religious  and  demonic.    Have  they  always  been like 
this since eternity, or have they become like this due to association?” 
 
15.3 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “In  the  beginning,  during  the  period  of 
destruction, both types of jeevs, religious and demonic, are absorbed 
within Mãyã.  Then, when the universe is created, both types of jeevs 
emerge,  each  with  their  own  nature.    There  are  also  ordinary jeevs 
who become religious or demonic due to association with religious or 
demonic jeevs.  Also, there are some religious and demonic jeevs who 
gradually develop such a nature due to the karmas they perform. 
 
15.4 
“However, the main cause of such religious and demonic natures is 
the grace or the fury of a sat-purush.  For example, Jay and Vijay were 
pãrshads of Bhagvãn, but since they insulted the religious Sanakãdik, 
they  attained  a  demonic  nature.    On  the  other  hand,  Prahlãdji  was  a 
demon,  but  since  he  absorbed  the  preaching  of Nãradji,  he  was 
known as a renowned bhakta of Bhagvãn.  Therefore, whomever the 
fury  of  a sat-purush falls  upon,  that jeev becomes  demonic; and 
whomever  a sat-purush is  pleased  upon,  that jeev becomes  religious.  
There   is   no   other   reason   for   becoming   religious   or   demonic.  
Therefore, a person who desires to attain kalyãn should by no means 
criticise Bhagvãn or   His bhaktas.    Instead,   he   should do   only 
whatever pleases Bhagvãn and His bhaktas.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 15 || 215 || 
 

VADTÃL 
- 629 - 
Vadtãl – 16 
The Pleasures Of The Fourteen Loks 
 
16.1 
In the Samvat year 1882, on Posh vad 13 [4
th
 February 1826], Swãmi 
Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   mattress   with   a 
cylindrical pillow that had been placed on a platform under the neem 
tree  in  front  of  the mandir of Shree Lakshmi-Nãrãyan in  Vadtãl.    He 
was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
16.2 
Also  sitting  in  the sabhã was  a shãstri from  Vadodarã.    He  said, 
“Mahãrãj, if you show a miracle to some worldly, renowned man, 
then  its  effect  will  be  very  beneficial  for  the  development  of  the 
satsang.” 
 
16.3 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “I do not get along very well with such 
worldly, renowned men.  After all, they have pride of their power and 
wealth,  whereas  I  have  pride  of tyãg and bhakti.    Therefore,  neither 
of  us  is  in  a  position  to  surrender  to  the  other.    Even  if  I  did  send 
some great man into samãdhi, then at most he would give a village or 
a part of his kingdom, neither of which I have the slightest desire for 
in my heart.  Even if I were to wish for a village or a part of a kingdom 
for  the  sake  of  happiness,  still  when  I  close  my  eyes  and  think  of 
Bhagvãn’s murti;  that  bliss  cannot  be  found  even  in  a  kingdom 
consisting of the fourteen loks. 
 
16.4 
“Also, if there is as much bliss in ruling a kingdom as there  is  in 
worshipping Bhagvãn,    then    why    would    great    kings,    such    as 
Svayambhuv  Manu,  leave  their  kingdoms  and  go  into  the  forests  to 
perform tap?    If  there  is  as  much  bliss  in  women  as  there  is  in 
worshipping Bhagvãn, then why would King Chitraketu abandon ten 
million women? 
 
16.5 
“Compared to the bliss of worshipping Bhagvãn,  the  bliss  of  the 
fourteen loks is  said  to  be  like  that  of Narak.    Therefore,  a  person 
whose  happiness  is  based  on  the  bliss  of Bhagvãn feels  that  the 

VADTÃL 
- 630 - 
pleasures  of  all  the vishays in the  entire brahmãnd are  like Narak.  
Even I feel that the bliss of worshipping Bhagvãn is the only real bliss 
– everything  else  is  full  of  misery.    Therefore,  while  worshipping 
Bhagvãn, if I encounter someone who is naturally drawn into satsang, 
then I encourage him; but there is no type of insistence in my heart.  I 
only insist upon engaging in the worship of Bhagvãn and keeping the 
company of bhaktas of Bhagvãn.  What I have disclosed before you is 
my inner belief.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 16 || 216 || 
 
 
Vadtãl – 17 
The Sevã Of A Bhakta Is Known As Bhakti 
 
17.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Posh  vad  Amãs [6
th
 February  1826], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress  with  a 
cylindrical  pillow  that  had  been  placed  in  the  mansion  facing  the 
mandir of Shree Lakshmi-Nãrãyan in Vadtãl.  He was dressed entirely 
in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of sãdhus,  as  well  as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
17.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked a question:  “Each of the five gnãn-
indriyas and  the  five karma-indriyas have  total  knowledge  of  their 
respective vishays.    Furthermore,  both  a  person  with gnãn and  a 
person without gnãn behave in the same way through their indriyas; 
the indriyas of the person with gnãn do not behave in a different way 
from  those  of  the  person  without gnãn.    However,  the  person  with 
gnãn is  said  to  have  conquered  the indriyas.    How  can  this  be  so?  
That is the question.” 
 
17.3 
Muktãnand Swãmi replied, “It seems that a person conquers his 
indriyas when he attains nirvikalp samãdhi.” 

VADTÃL 
- 631 - 
17.4 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Even a person who has attained nirvikalp 
samãdhi indulges  in  the panch vishays through  the indriyas just  like 
everyone   else;   so,   how   can   he   be   said   to   have   conquered   his 
indriyas?” 
 
17.5 
Muktãnand Swãmi made many attempts to answer the question, but 
he was unable to give a satisfactory explanation. 
 
17.6 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “The answer is that he realises that there 
is  only  misery  in  the panch-vishays (shabda,  sparsh,  rup,  ras,  and 
gandh).    He  also  realises  that  there  are  only kalyãn-kãri qualities  in 
the svarup of Bhagvãn.  He even realises that by indulging in worldly 
vishays,   the jeev is   condemned   to Narak,   where   he   must   suffer 
terrible miseries.  Having realised this, he develops an intense hatred 
towards  the panch-vishays.    There  is  no  way  a  person  will  have  love 
towards  something  with  which  he  has  such  hatred.    A  person  who 
realises  this,  and  then  develops  an  extreme  hatred  in  his  mind 
towards the panch-vishays can be said to have conquered his indriyas.  
As  a  result  of  this,  he  spends  the  rest  of  his  life  offering bhakti to 
Bhagvãn by   listening   to   talks   of Bhagvãn,   singing kirtans,   and 
performing sevã.    However,  unlike  a vimukh,  he  does  not  become 
attached  to  the panch-vishays.  Such  a  person  is  known  to  have 
conquered his indriyas.” 
 
17.7 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked another question:  “Suppose there is a 
tyãgi who has adopted the path of nivrutti.  He realises himself to be 
the ãtmã and  does  not  believe  his  body  to  be  his  true svarup.    Also, 
his  physical  behaviour  is  rather  unusual  and  irregular.    This  man 
does not have any pride of his varna and ãshram.  The way in which 
he eats, drinks, rises, and sits is all rather unusual – it does not seem 
to match the norms of society.  Such a tyãgi does not stay in anyone’s 
company;  he  is  like  a  young,  carefree  deer,  wandering  alone  in  a 
forest.  He cannot be bound by anything in any way. 
 

VADTÃL 
- 632 - 
17.8 
“On the other hand, there is another tyãgi who behaves in accordance 
with  the  path  of pravrutti,  despite  also  having  adopted  the  path 
nivrutti.      When   he   engages   in pravrutti that   brings   out   vicious 
natures,  such  as kãm, krodh, lobh, moh, mad, matsar, ãshã,  and 
trushnã, it also causes a disturbance in his heart.  So, is it appropriate 
for such a tyãgi to continue following the path of pravrutti?  If he does 
remain on the path of pravrutti, how could he remain undisturbed?  If 
you say, ‘If he follows the path of pravrutti by Bhagvãn’s ãgnã then he 
will not become attached to anything’,  then  a  person  can  argue, ‘If 
someone  drinks  bhãng by Bhagvãn’s ãgnã, does that mean he will not 
become delirious?  Of course, he will become delirious’.  Then, how can 
that tyãgi follow  the  path  of pravrutti and  not  become  attached  to 
anything?  That is the question.” 
 
17.9 
Hearing  this,  Nityãnand  Swãmi  and  Shuk  Muni  attempted  to  give  an 
explanation, but were unable to give an accurate reply. 
 
17.10 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “The tyãgi who abides by nivrutti dharma 
only  and  who  behaves  in  an  unusual  way  should  be  known  as  a 
person who has only ãtmã-nishthã.  On the other hand, the tyãgi who 
has adopted nivrutti dharma but also offers bhakti to Bhagvãn should 
vigilantly  adopt  the  path  of pravrutti related  to Bhagvãn and  His 
bhaktas while  staying  within  the niyams prescribed  by Bhagvãn.    In 
fact, adopting the path of pravrutti in order to serve Bhagvãn and His 
bhaktas is the very definition of bhakti. 
 
17.11 
“The tyãgi who has adopted the path of nivrutti and who has only the 
virtue  of  ãtmã-nishthã can  never  be  equal  to  the tyãgi who  has 
adopted  the  path  of pravrutti.    This  is  because  although  he  is  also  a 
tyãgi who has adopted the path of nivrutti, he engages in pravrutti for 
the  purpose  of  being  able  to  serve Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas.   Such  a 
person  should  stay  on  the  path  of pravrutti while  abiding  by  the 
niyams prescribed  by Bhagvãn.    However,  he  should  never  do  more 
than  or  do  less  than  those niyams.    While  discarding  vicious  natures 

VADTÃL 
- 633 - 
such  as kãm, krodh, lobh, moh, mad, matsar, ãshã,  and trushnã,  he 
should   follow   the   path   of pravrutti for   the   purpose   of   serving 
Bhagvãn and His bhaktas.  As a result, he will never become attached 
to  anything.    Compared  to  the tyãgi who  has  only ãtmã-nishthã,  this 
tyãgi is far superior, and it is he who earns the grace of Bhagvãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 17 || 217 || 
 
 
Vadtãl – 18 
Fundamental Facts Of The Swãminãrãyan Sampradãy 
 
18.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  after  the sandhyã ãrti on Mahã sud 1  [7
th
 
February  1826],  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress  with  a 
cylindrical pillow that had been placed under the dome of the mandir 
of Shree Lakshmi-Nãrãyan in  Vadtãl.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in 
white clothes.  A sabhã of the paramhans, as well as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered on all four sides around Him. 
 
18.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Seeing that you are all senior paramhans, 
I shall ask you a question:  Which facts are essential for a satsangi to 
understand?  If someone were to ask him, or if he were to experience 
a  doubt  in  his  own  mind,  then  without  knowing  these  facts,  how 
would he be able to find the solution?” 
 
18.3 
Having  asked  the  question,  Mahãrãj  Himself  continued,  “I  shall 
answer the question myself.  Firstly, a person should realise that our 
sampradãy is the Uddhav Sampradãy, and therefore, a person should 
know its customs. 
 
18.4 
“Secondly, a person should know the line of succession of our gurus.  
He  should  know  that  Rãmãnand  Swãmi  was  the avatãr of  Uddhav 
himself;  and  in  a  dream,  that  same  Rãmãnand  Swãmi  was  initiated 
into the Vaishnav sect by Rãmãnuj-Ãchãrya in Shreerang-Kshetra.  So, 
Rãmãnand Swãmi’s guru was Rãmãnuj-Ãchãrya, and I am Rãmãnand 

VADTÃL 
- 634 - 
Swãmi’s shishya.  A person should understand the succession of gurus 
in  this way.    In  addition,  he  should  understand  the  tradition  of  the 
Dharma-Kul that I have established. 
 
 
18.5 
“Thirdly, a person should know the authoritative shãstras of  our 
sampradãy,  the  names  of  which  are:  Ved,  Vyãs  Sutra,  Shreemad 
Bhãgvat  Purãn,  Vishnu-Sahasranãm  from  the  Mahãbhãrat,  Bhagvad 
Geetã,  Vidur-Niti,  Vãsudev  Mahãtmya  from  the  Vishnu-Khand  of  the 
Skand  Purãn,  and  Yãgnavalkya  Smruti.    A  person should  know  these 
eight shãstras. 
 
18.6 
“Fourthly, a person should know all the niyams which are prescribed 
for all satsangis. 
 
18.7 
“Fifthly, a person should understand Shree Krishna Bhagvãn,  our 
ishta-dev, and also the variety of the svarup of Shree Krishna Bhagvãn 
due to varying locations, followers, and actions. 
 
18.8 
“In addition, the pratyaksha and the non-pratyaksha svarups of Shree 
Krishna Bhagvãn should be understood.  He is non-pratyaksha in the 
sense that Shree Krishna Bhagvãn resides in Akshardhãm in the midst 
of Golok, which is beyond the darkness of Mãyã.  He has two arms and 
is  as  luminous  as  millions  and  millions  of  suns,  while  He  has  a  dark 
complexion.   Rãdhikãji and Lakshmiji are  beside  Him,  and  He  is 
served by pãrshads, such as Nand, Sunand, and Shreedãmã.  He is the 
cause of creation, sustenance, and destruction of countless millions of 
brahmãnds.    He  reigns  as  the  supreme  ruler  of  everything.    This 
Bhagvãn sometimes assumes a svarup with four arms; sometimes, He 
assumes a svarup with eight arms; and He may even assume a svarup 
with  a  thousand  arms.    He  also  assumes  all  the svarups of  the  four 
avatãrs (Vãsudev, Sankarshan, Aniruddha, and Pradyumna); as well as 
the twenty-four avatãrs.  He also takes birth through avatãrs such as 
Varãh, Nrusinh, Vãman, Kapil-Dev,  and Hayagriv,  while  He  actually 
always  possesses  two  arms.    It  is  this  same svarup that  has  been 
described  in  the  Upanishads,  the  Sãnkhya shãstras,  the  Yog shãstras, 

VADTÃL 
- 635 - 
and  the  Panch-Rãtra.    This  is  how Bhagvãn’s svarup is  described  as 
being non-pratyaksha. 
 
18.9 
“Furthermore,  of  all  the ãchãryas that   have   lived, Vyãsji is   the 
greatest.    Even  Shankar-Ãchãrya  cannot  be  said  to  be  like Vyãsji.    In 
fact,  nor  can  Rãmãnuj-Ãchãrya,  nor  can  Mãdhvã-Ãchãrya,  nor  can 
Nimbãrk,  nor  can  Vishnu Swãmi, and  nor can Vallabh-Ãchãrya.   This 
is  because  those ãchãryas will  only  be  accepted  as  respected  in  the 
world   if   they   accept   the   greatness   of Vyãsji’s words; but   not 
otherwise.    However, Vyãsji does  not  need  to  rely  upon  anyone  else 
to be respected.  This is because Vyãsji is the ãchãrya of the Veds and 
is  Himself  an avatãr of Bhagvãn.    Therefore,  we  should  abide  by 
Vyãsji’s teachings only. 
 
18.10 
“That same Vyãsji, for the kalyãn of the jeevs, separated the Veds into 
four parts, wrote the seventeen Purãns, and the Mahãbhãrat.  Still, he 
felt in his mind, ‘I have not been able to carefully explain the methods 
for the kalyãn of the jeevs’.  As a result, he did not feel satisfied in his 
mind.    So,  he  wrote  the  Shreemad  Bhãgvat  Purãn,  which  is  the 
essence of all the Veds, the Purãns, the historical shãstras, the Panch-
Rãtra,  the  Yog shãstras,  and  the  Sãnkhya shãstras.   In  that  Shreemad 
Bhãgvat, He has described Shree Krishna Bhagvãn as greater than all 
the  other avatãrs,  and  that  all  the avatãrs originate  from  that  same 
Shree Krishna Bhagvãn. 
 
18.11 
“In the Gun-Vibhãg chapter  of  the  Shreemad  Bhãgvat, Shree  Krishna 
Bhagvãn says  to  Uddhav, ‘I am nirgun, and whoever comes  into  my 
contact also becomes nirgun’.  That is why all those who came into my 
contact  with Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn – with  whichever  feeling – also 
became nirgun, regardless of whether it was a feeling of lust, hatred, 
fear, friendship, or love.  Therefore, Shree Krishna Bhagvãn Himself is 
nirgun.    This  is  how Vyãsji has  described Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn.  
Also, Vyãsji has  established  the  following  principle:   ‘Shree Krishna 
Bhagvãn  Himself  is  the  Bhagvãn  who  assumes  all  the  avatãrs,  and  all 
other avatãrs are also Him’.  If Shree Krishna Bhagvãn is described as 

VADTÃL 
- 636 - 
being  merely  the  embodiment  of  pure sattva-gun instead  of  being 
described as nirgun, then a person has not grasped the context of the 
Shreemad Bhãgvat and it results in a major misunderstanding.  After 
all,  the gopis did  not  realise Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn to  be Bhagvãn; 
their  feeling  of  lust  for Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn was  their  method  of 
worship  of  Him.    However,  they  still  became nirgun.    Then,  how  can 
Shree Krishna Bhagvãn be described as being merely the embodiment 
of  pure sattva-gun?    Therefore, Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn is  definitely 
nirgun.  In addition, Shree Krishna Bhagvãn Himself has said to Arjun: 
 
janma karma cha me divyam-evam yo vetti tattvataha 
tyaktvã deham punar-janma naiti mãm-eti sorjuna 
He who thoroughly realises my birth and actions to be divya will not take 
another birth when he leaves his body.  Instead, he will attain me. 
 
18.12 
“At the time of His birth, Shree Krishna Bhagvãn showed Vãsudev and 
Devki His svarup with four arms so that they would realise Him to be 
Bhagvãn.    He  also showed Brahmã many svarups with four  arms;  He 
showed  Akrur  the svarup of Shesh-Shãyi  Nãrãyan;  and  He  showed 
Himself in the Vishvarup form to Arjun.  In this way, it is acceptable to 
make  distinctions  in  the  types  of  worship  of Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn 
due  to  differences  in  His svarups.    However,  this  true svarup is 
different. 
 
18.13
 “In Vraj, Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn was  known  as  Bãl-Mukund;  He  was 
also  called  Murli-Manohar,  and  Rãdhã-Krishna;  He  used  to  take  the 
cows  and  calves  for  grazing;  He  lifted  Mount  Govardhan;  He  played 
rãs with  the gopis;  He  went  to  Mathurã  and  killed  Kans;  He  pleased 
the Yãdavs; He studied at the home of the brãhman named Sãndipani; 
He  associated  with  Kubjã;  He  stayed  in  Dvãrkã,  where  He  married 
eight  queens,  such  as  Rukmani;  He  also  wedded  sixteen  thousand 
women; while staying in Hastinãpur, He protected the Pãndavs from 
all  the  calamities  which  fell  upon  them;  He  saved  Draupadi  from 
humiliation;  and  He  became  Arjun’s charioteer.  In this way, there 
were  many leelãs of Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn due  to  differences  in 
locations.  However, from this, a person should not make distinctions 

VADTÃL 
- 637 - 
in the types of worship of Shree Krishna Bhagvãn’s two-armed svarup.  
A  person  who  does,  should  be  known  as  a  blasphemer  of  the guru 
and the guru’s word. 
 
18.14 
“In fact, Shree Krishna Bhagvãn has behaved in many different ways.  
He  has  eaten  the  leftovers  of  the cow-herds  and has even  played rãs 
with  the gopis.    However,  the bhaktas of Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn 
should   not   imitate   His   behaviour.      Instead,   they   should   behave 
according  to  the  characteristics  of  a sãdhu and  abide  by  the dharma 
of  their varna and ãshram.    They  should  offer bhakti to  Him  as 
prescribed  by Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn in  the  eleventh skandh of  the 
Shreemad  Bhãgvat,  the  Bhagvad  Geetã,  and  the  Vãsudev  Mahãtmya.  
However,  they  should  behave  as Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn behaved.    A 
person  who  does  behave  as Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn behaved  is  a 
vimukh, and is not my satsangi. 
 
18.15 
“Just  as  a  person  should  not  imitate  the  behaviour  of  our ishta-dev 
Shree Krishna Bhagvãn,  similarly,  as  I  am  your ãchãrya,  your guru, 
and  your adviser, you  should  not  imitate  my  physical  behaviour.  
Instead,  all  of  you  should  behave  according  to  my ãgnãs that  I  have 
prescribed for those in my sampradãy; but no one should imitate my 
behaviour. 
 
18.16 
“All paramhans and all satsangis should learn these facts which I have 
told  you.    After  understanding  them,  all  should  behave  accordingly.  
Also,  when  speaking with  others,  you  should  tell  them  to  behave 
similarly.” 
 
18.17 
Having  said  this,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  left  for  dinner.    Upon  hearing  this 
talk, all the sãdhus and satsangis understood that the non-pratyaksha 
svarup of Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn whom  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  spoke  of  is 
none other than this Shreeji Mahãrãj, son of Bhakti and Dharma, and 
that  no  one  is  greater  than  Him.    It  is  only  He  who  is  our ishta-dev, 
and it is only He who is our guru. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 18 || 218 || 

VADTÃL 
- 638 - 
Vadtãl – 19 
Becoming A Bhakta Of Bhagvãn 
 
19.1 
In the Samvat year 1882, on the evening of Mahã sud 2 [8
th
 February 
1826],  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress  with  a  cylindrical 
pillow that had been placed in the eastern rup-choki of the mandir of 
Shree  Lakshmi-Nãrãyan in  Vadtãl.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from various places, 
had gathered before Him. 
 
19.2 
Then,   after   the sandhyã   ãrti had   finished,   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   said, 
“Please listen, I wish to speak to all of you about Bhagvãn.  Whenever 
a jeev attains  a  human  body  in Bharat-Khand, Bhagvãn’s avatãrs or 
Bhagvãn’s sãdhus will certainly also be present on earth at that time.  
If that jeev can recognise them, then he becomes a bhakta of Bhagvãn. 
 
19.3 
“Once he has become a bhakta of Bhagvãn, it would be improper for 
him  to  have  love  for  anything  except Bhagvãn.    This  is  because, 
compared  to  the  bliss  of  the dhãm of Bhagvãn,  the  pleasures  of 
worldly vishays are like faeces.  Only worms that live in the faeces feel 
that  there  is  profound  bliss – a  human  would  realise  faeces  to  be 
nothing  but  utter  misery.    Therefore,  a  person  who  has  recognised 
Bhagvãn becomes  a pãrshad of Bhagvãn.    Then,  he  should  not  cease 
to  be  an  attendant  of Bhagvãn by  desiring  to  enjoy  the  pleasures  of 
worldly vishays like worms in faeces. 
 
19.4 
“Also,  whatever  a bhakta of Bhagvãn wishes   for   comes   true.  
Therefore, he is extremely careless when he desires any object other 
than Bhagvãn out  of  ignorance.    That  is  why  a bhakta of Bhagvãn 
should consider the pleasures and delights of the fourteen loks to be 
like  the  faeces  of  a  cow.    He  should  have  strong  love  only  towards 
Bhagvãn and  His bhakta,  by  thought,  word,  and  deed.    He  should 
believe, ‘If a bhakta of Bhagvãn has some desires remaining  in  him 
other  than  those  of  Bhagvãn,  he  will  still  attain  the  status  of  Indra  or 

VADTÃL 
- 639 - 
will   attain   Brahm-Lok.      However,   unlike   worldly   people,   he   will 
certainly  not  pass  through  the  cycle  of  births  and  deaths  or  go  to 
Narak.    If  that  is  so,  then  how  can a  person  describe  the  greatness  of 
Bhagvãn  and  the  bliss  enjoyed  by  a  true  bhakta  of  Bhagvãn?’  
Therefore,  a bhakta of Bhagvãn should  maintain  deep  love  only  for 
Bhagvãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 19 || 219 || 
 
 
Vadtãl – 20 
Janak Rãjã’s Understanding 
 
20.1 
In the Samvat year 1882, on Mahã sud 3 [10
th
 February 1826], Swãmi 
Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   mattress   with   a 
cylindrical  pillow  that  had  been  placed  on  a  square  platform  under 
the neem tree in the darbãr of the mandir of Shree Lakshmi-Nãrãyan 
in  Vadtãl.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    Garlands  of 
chameli flowers were hanging around His neck.  In addition to this, a 
red  umbrella  made  from  fine,  silken  cloth  had  been  placed  above 
Him.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places, 
had gathered before Him. 
 
20.2 
Then,   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   asked   the paramhans a  question:    “Kãm 
evolves from rajo-gun, and krodh and lobh evolve from tamo-gun.  So, 
which  one  spiritual  activity  totally  uproots  the  seeds  of kãm, krodh, 
and lobh? 
 
20.3 
Shuk Muni replied, “The seeds of these vicious natures are burnt 
from a person’s heart only when he attains nirvikalp samãdhi and 
when he sees the ãtmã.” 
 
20.4 
Hearing this, Shreeji Mahãrãj raised a doubt:  “Did not Shiv, Brahmã, 
Shrungi Rushi, Parãshar, and Nãrad have nirvikalp samãdhi?  All were 
overcome  by kãm.    However,  despite  their  attainment  of nirvikalp 

VADTÃL 
- 640 - 
samãdhi,  when  the vruttis of  their indriyas reverted  outwards,  they 
were overcome by the vicious natures, like kãm, and krodh.  For this 
reason, what you have said cannot be the answer to the question.  In 
fact,  just  as  a  person  with gnãn remains  undisturbed  in nirvikalp 
samãdhi,   a   person   without gnãn also   remains   undisturbed   in 
sushupti.    When  the vruttis of  the indriyas revert  outwards,  both  are 
disturbed  by kãm and krodh.    Therefore,  there  does  not  seem  to  be 
any   distinction   between   the   person   with gnãn and   the   person 
without gnãn.  Now,   other paramhans may   try   to   answer   the 
question.” 
 
20.5 
Then,  Gopãlãnand  Swãmi,  Devãnand  Swãmi,  Nityãnand  Swãmi,  and 
Muktãnand  Swãmi  collectively  attempted  to  answer  the  question 
according  to  their  understanding,  but  they  could  not  give  a  precise 
response to Shreeji Mahãrãj’s question. 
 
20.6 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Janak Rãjã followed the path of pravrutti, 
and  yet  he  was  undisturbed.    For  example,  when  a  female tyãgi 
named Sulbhã came into Janak Raja’s court, He told Sulbhã, ‘Though 
you are trying to seduce my mind, by the grace of my guru Panch-Shikh 
Rushi, I have mastered the shãstras of both Sãnkhya and Yog.  So, even 
if half of my body is smeared with sandalwood paste and the other half 
is  slashed  with  a  sword,  both  would  be  the  same  to  me.    Even  if  my 
Mithilã  were  to  burn  down,  still  nothing  of  mine  would  be  burned.  
Therefore,  even though  I have  adopted  the  path of pravrutti,  I  am  still 
unaffected and undisturbed’.    This  is  what  Janak  Rãjã  said  to  Sulbhã.  
Also, Janak Rãjã was said to be the guru of Shukji. 
 
20.7 
“Therefore, the answer to the question is as follows:  A person’s 
indriyas may  be  directed  outwards  and  he  may  be  on  the  path  of 
pravrutti,  but  if  he  has a  firm understanding  in  his heart,  like  that  of 
Janak  Rãjã  ,  then  he  will  in  no  way  become  disturbed  by  vicious 
natures, like kãm, and krodh. 
 

VADTÃL 
- 641 - 
20.8 
“After a person has thoroughly known that which needs to be known 
– this  is  true  and  this  is  false – he  realises  that  except Bhagvãn’s 
svarup,  all  worldly  objects  are  full  of  terrible  miseries,  and  that  they 
are  all  perishable.    Also,  he  realises  himself  to  be  the ãtmã,  distinct 
from his body, his indriyas, and his antah-karans.  After this, there is 
no object that would be strong enough to seduce him.  This is because 
he sees all worldly objects as worthless.  So, even if all the indriyas of 
a  person  in  whose  heart  such  understanding  has  become  firmly 
rooted  were  to  extend  outwards  on  the  path  of pravrutti,  still  he 
would not be disturbed by vicious natures, like kãm, and krodh. 
 
20.9 
“The seeds of vicious natures, like kãm,  and krodh,  in  the  heart  of 
such a bhakta of Bhagvãn will be destroyed, whether he is a tyãgi or a 
grahastha.      Also,   of   all   the bhaktas of Bhagvãn,   he   is   the   best 
Vaishnavs.    So,  being  a tyãgi or  a grahastha is  of  no  significance.  
Instead,  a  person  whose  understanding  is  greater  should  be  known 
as being a greater bhakta than the rest. 
 
20.10 
“The mistake of those like Shiv and Brahmã were  mentioned  only  to 
illustrate that when they encountered unpleasant desh, kãl, kriyã, and 
sang,  even  they  were  disturbed  by  vicious  natures,  regardless  of 
whether   they   had   deficiencies   in   their   understanding   or   not.  
Therefore,  even  if  a  person  has  this  understanding,  he  should  never 
associate  with  any  type  of  evil  influence.    This  is  the  universal 
principle.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 20 || 220 || 
 
 
|| End of Shree Vadtãl Prakaran ||

AMDÃVÃD 
- 642 - 
|| SHREE SWÃMINÃRAYAN VIJAYTETRÃM || 
 
VACHANÃMRUT 
Shree Amdãvãd Prakaran 
 
Amdãvãd – 1 
Extraordinary Dhyãn 
 
1.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Mahã vad 11  [4
th
 March  1826],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  facing  west  in  the mandir of 
Shree  Nar-Nãrãyan in  Amdãvãd.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.  Garlands of roses were hanging around His neck, bunches of 
roses  had  been  placed  upon  His  ears,  and  tassels  of  roses  decorated 
His pãgh.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas,  from  various 
places had gathered before Him. 
 
1.2 
In  the sabhã,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  sat  in  deep  thought.    He  then  opened 
His  eyes,  looked  at  the sabhã, and said, “I wish to talk  to  all  of  you 
about  a  particular  type  of dhyãn that  has  also  been  described  in  the 
Moksh-Dharma.    I  have  seen  many  great  people  who  have  attained 
siddh-dashã through   this   type   of dhyãn.      In   fact,   even   in   my 
experience,  among  the  countless  types  of dhyãn,  there  are  none 
comparable  to  the  particular  type  of dhyãn that  I  wish  to  tell  you 
about  now.    Just  as  a mantra or  medicine  is  naturally  extraordinary, 
the  type  of dhyãn I  wish  to  describe  to  you  also  has  an  intrinsically 
miraculous nature by which a person instantly attains siddh-dashã. 
 
1.3 
“Now, I shall describe that dhyãn.  A person should perform dhyãn on 
the  sun  in  the  right  eye  and  perform dhyãn on  the  moon  in  the  left 
eye.  Then, while performing dhyãn in this way, the sun and the moon 
begin to appear in the eyes exactly as they are in the sky.  As a result, 
the right eye begins to heat up, and the left eye begins to cool down.  
Then,  the  sun  should  be  envisioned  in  the  left  eye  and  the  moon  in 
the  right  eye.    After  visualising  in  this  way,  the sun,  and  the  moon 

AMDÃVÃD 
- 643 - 
should be visualised within the hruday-ãkãsh.  In addition, the svarup 
of  his  own jeev,  the  observer,  should  also  be  seen.    He  should  also 
perform dhyãn upon Bhagvãn – who  resides  within  the  observer 
(within his own jeev).  At that point, his body, which is full of worldly 
desires,  is  felt  to  rotate  in  the  sky  like  a  pulley  mechanism  used  for 
drawing water from a well. 
 
1.4
 “Eventually, a person who performs dhyãn in  this  way  attains  the 
darshan of Bhagvãn’s Vishvarup form,  within  which  he  also  sees  the 
system   of   the   fourteen loks.      That svarup is   not   seen   as   being 
extremely large; it is seen in the same way that Mãrkandey Rushi saw 
the  entire brahmãnd in  the  stomach  of  the  child svarup of Bhagvãn 
sleeping on the leaf of a banyan tree. 
 
1.5 
“Having  performed dhyãn in   this   way,   a   person   is   able   to   see 
everything  that  is  described  in  the shãstras.    Then,  all  remaining 
nãstik feelings within his jeevãtmã are resolved, and the jeev becomes 
extremely  powerful.    In  addition,  he  develops  a  firm  belief  that 
whatever  is  stated  in  the shãstras is  true.    The  eight  extraordinary 
powers become accessible to a person who performs this dhyãn, and 
his vision reaches as far as the rays of the sun and moon.  In this way, 
countless   extraordinary   powers   appear before   that   person,   but 
because  he  is  a bhakta of Bhagvãn,  he  does  not  accept  any  of  those 
powers.    Instead,  he  performs dhyãn only  on Bhagvãn.    As  a  result, 
the   performer   of   this dhyãn attains siddh-dashã like Nãrad,   the 
Sanakãdik,  and  Shukji.    Therefore, there  are  countless  varieties  of 
dhyãn, but only this form of dhyãn grants instant siddh-dashã.” 
 
1.6 
After  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  concluded  this  description,  Muktãnand  Swãmi 
asked, “Is this dhyãn attained  only  by  a  person  who  practices  the 
prãnãyãm of ashtãng-yog, or can it be attained by others as well?” 
 
1.7 
Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “It does not matter whether a person 
practices prãnãyãm or  not.    Only  if  he  practices  this dhyãn and  is  an 
ekãntik bhakta of Bhagvãn can  he  perfect  it.    However,  people are 

AMDÃVÃD 
- 644 - 
unable  to  walk  this  path.    Therefore,  for  those  who  are  eligible  to 
perform  this dhyãn,  there  is  no  alternative  method  for  instantly 
becoming siddh other  than  the  method  of dhyãn that  I  have  just 
described.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Amdãvãd || 1 || 221 || 
 
 
Amdãvãd – 2 
Performing Pujã After Washing And Bathing 
The Best Bhakta Abandons Worldly Responsibilities 
 
2.1 
In the Samvat year 1882, on Fãgan sud 11 [20
th
 March 1826], Swãmi 
Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   mattress   with   a 
cylindrical  pillow  that  had  been  placed  on  a  wooden  bedstead  on  a 
square  platform  in  front  of  the mandir of Shree  Nar-Nãrãyan in 
Amdãvãd.    He  was  wearing  a  white khes and  had  covered  Himself 
with  a  white chofãl.    He  had  also  tied  a  pink feto around  His  head, 
with  tassels  of  roses  dangling  from  it.    Also,  two  bunches  of  roses 
adorned His neck.  In addition to this, bãjubandh and gajarã of roses 
had been tied around His arms.  In this way, His entire body had been 
decorated with roses.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
2.2 
Then,  addressing  all  the paramhans, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “I would 
like to ask you a question.  Suppose there is a bhakta of Bhagvãn who 
behaves  above  the  influence  of jãgrat, svapna,  and sushupti.    He  has 
shed  the  influence  of  polluted rajo-gun, tamo-gun,  and sattva-gun, 
and  acts  within  pure sattva-gun.    That  is  how  he  worships Bhagvãn.  
Another bhakta behaves under  the influence of  the  three gun but he 
does  have  intense  love  for Bhagvãn.    Of  these  two bhaktas,  who  is 
better?” 
 
2.3 
Then,  the sãdhus replied,  “The bhakta with  love  for Bhagvãn is 
better.” 

AMDÃVÃD 
- 645 - 
2.4 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then questioned, “Now, consider the following:  One 
person   performs pujã of Bhagvãn after   washing,   bathing,   and 
becoming  pure;  and  another  performs pujã in  an  impure  state.    Of 
these two, who is better?” 
 
2.5 
The munis replied, “The person who performs pujã after  becoming 
pure is better.” 
 
2.6 
Hearing this, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “You claim that the person who 
worships Bhagvãn after overcoming mãyik influences is inferior, and 
the  person  who expresses  love  for Bhagvãn with mãyik influences is 
superior.  But, how is he superior?” 
 
2.7 
Since no one could answer the question, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Of the 
four types of bhaktas (ãrta, jignãsu, arthãrthi, and gnãni) described in 
the   Geetã, Shree   Krishna   Bhagvãn had   called   the   only bhaktas 
possessing gnãn His own ãtmã.  Therefore, the person who becomes 
brahm-rup after   having   discarded mãyik influences,   and   then 
worships Bhagvãn, is the best bhakta. 
 
2.8 
“This is because nitya-pralay is the jeev’s sushupti state.  Nimit-pralay 
is Brahmã’s sushupti state.  Prãkrut-pralay is when all the entities that 
have  evolved  from Prakruti merge  back  into Prakruti.    In ãtyantik-
pralay, which is gnãn-pralay, everything up to and including Prakruti 
is  hidden  by  the  light  of Brahm.    Furthermore,  in nitya-pralay,  all  of 
the jeev’s responsibilities  are  absorbed;  and  in prãkrut-pralay,  all  of 
Purush’s responsibilities  are  absorbed.    However,  when  the  creation 
process  is  initiated,  all  three  are  again  engulfed  by  their  respective 
responsibilities. 
 
2.9 
“However, a person who has overcome mãyik influences  by  way  of 
ãtyantik-pralay,  also  called gnãn-pralay,  is  never  engulfed  by  those 
responsibilities again.  If at any time he does assume a physical body, 
then  just  like Bhagvãn assumes  a  body  by  His  own  will,  he  also 
assumes  a  body  of  his  own  will;  he  does  not  assume  a  body  due  to 
Kãl, karma, or Mãyã. 

AMDÃVÃD 
- 646 - 
2.10 
“Therefore,  the  person  who  worships Bhagvãn after   becoming 
brahm-rup is  definitely  superior.    Only  a  person  who  is  a  faithful 
bhakta of Bhagvãn and  possesses  the  characteristics  of  an ekãntik 
bhakta can understand this fact.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Amdãvãd || 2 || 222 || 
 
 
Amdãvãd – 3 
The Branch Of A Banyan Tree 
The Upsham State 
   
3.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Fãgan vad 2 [25
th
 March  1826],  Swãmi 
Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a decorated bedstead that 
had  been  placed  on  the  platform  facing  the mandir of Shree Nar-
Nãrãyan in Amdãvãd.  A pink pãgh, decorated with garlands of roses 
and chameli flowers,  adorned  His head.   A sabhã of munis, as well as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
3.2 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  the  entire muni-mandal, “All jeevs are 
dependent upon the panch-vishays.  Either they physically indulge in 
them,  or  if  physical  association  is  not  possible,  they  think  of  them 
within the antah-karans – but the jeev is unable to remain for even a 
moment without thinking about or indulging in the panch-vishays. 
 
3.3 
“Now, take the  example  of  a  banyan  tree.    Everyone  knows  that  the 
roots  of  a  banyan  tree  keep  the  tree  green.    Even  if  all  of  its  roots, 
except  for  a  few  minor  roots, are uprooted,  the  banyan  tree  will still 
remain  green.    In  the  same  way,  a  person  may  have  outwardly 
abandoned  the panch-vishays,  but  if  thoughts  of  them  still  remain, 
then  those  thoughts  become  a  cause  of  births  and  deaths.    The 
question is how can these panch-vishays not become a cause of births 
and deaths for a bhakta of Bhagvãn?” 
 
3.4 
Muktãnand Swãmi attempted to answer the question, but was unable 
to offer a satisfactory reply. 

AMDÃVÃD 
- 647 - 
3.5 
So, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Here, I shall answer the question.  When a 
bhakta thinks about the murti of Bhagvãn while behaving as the ãtmã 
– independent of the qualities of the three bodies, which are engulfed 
in mãyã – then  by  the  power  of  those  thoughts  of Bhagvãn,  he 
behaves in a state of upsham.  Then, due to the power of that upsham, 
the panch-vishays do not become a cause of births and deaths. 
 
3.6 
“Consider the following  analogy:    When  rivers  like  the  Mahi  or  the 
Sãbarmati  are  in  full  flow  between  their  two  banks,  even  elephants, 
horses,  and  trees  are  all  carried  away;  nothing  is  able  to  remain 
stationary.   Similarly, for a  person  in  the upsham state,  regardless of 
how attractive the objects presented before the indriyas are, when he 
focuses  his  attention  within,  they  are  forgotten,  just  as  those vishays 
seen  in  past  lives  are  forgotten  in  this  life.    Such  behaviour  of  a 
bhakta is known as upsham. 
 
3.7 
“Such upsham is indeed  extremely  important.    Suppose  an  ignorant 
man  and  woman,  who  are  engaged  in  worldly  life  and  who  have 
intense  love  for  each  other  before  marriage,  are  then  married  and 
made to stay awake and walk continuously for three days and nights.  
Then,   when   they   are   united,   due   to   their   fatigue,   they   will   be 
incapable of enjoying the pleasure of each other’s beauty or touch.  
Even  if  they  embrace  each  other,  they  would  sleep  like  logs  tied 
together,  but  would  not  experience  any  enjoyment  from  the panch-
vishays.    So,  if  they  have  no  awareness  of  the vishays due  to upsham 
attained  ignorance  during sushupti,  then  how  can  the panch-vishays 
bind  a  person  with siddh-dashã who  attains  the  state  of upsham by 
performing dhyãn upon Bhagvãn’s murti?  They certainly do not bind 
him.    Therefore,  the panch-vishays are  not  a  cause  of  births  and 
deaths for a person who has attained upsham.” 
 
3.8 
Then,  Nityãnand  Swãmi  commented,  “The  method  you  have 
described  for  attaining  the  state  of upsham (performing dhyãn upon 
Bhagvãn after ãtmã-nishthã) is very difficult.  Please tell us if there is 
another, easier method apart from that.” 

AMDÃVÃD 
- 648 - 
3.9 
Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “A bhakta of Bhagvãn who  deeply  understands 
the  greatness  of Bhagvãn,  and  performs darshan of Bhagvãn, and 
serves Him and His bhaktas with extremely intense shraddhã, attains 
that upsham state. 
 
3.10 
“However, it appears to me that a servant with mãn will not be liked 
by  anyone.    To  have  a  servant  with mãn serve  a  person  is  like  when 
even  the  rich  survive  by  eating kodrã during  a  famine;  having  a 
servant  with mãn to  serve  a  person  is  similar  to  this.    The  master  is 
not  as  pleased  with  a  servant  with mãn as  much  as  he  is  with  a 
humble servant.  Therefore, a person who does whatever pleases the 
master is a true servant.” 
 
3.11
 Shuk Muni then asked, “How can a person without wisdom and 
understanding please his master?” 
 
3.12 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Even though Mulji Brahm-Chãri and Ratanji 
are  not  extremely  intelligent,  they  have  an  intense  yearning  for 
kalyãn.      So,   they   do  indeed   know  how   to   do  whatever   pleases 
Bhagvãn. 
 
3.13 
“Also,  currently,  even  the paramhans and   the sãnkhya-yogi and 
karma-yogi satsangis do not behave in a way that pleases me, like the 
bhaktas of Ayodhyã men and women.  This is because the bhaktas of 
Ayodhyã have  totally  dedicated  their  lives  for satsang.    Therefore, 
nobody  knows  how  to  please Bhagvãn like  the bhaktas of  Ayodhyã.  
Moreover,   these bhaktas of   Ayodhyã are   extremely   trusting;   a 
cunning person can cheat them.  Therefore, if they wish to begin any 
activity,  they  should  be  allowed  to  do  so  only  after  consulting  the 
senior paramhans and  senior satsangi  grahasthas.    However,  they 
should  not  be  allowed  to  do  that  activity  based  on  the  word  of  a 
single person.  In this way, the tyãgis and grahastha satsangis should 
look after the bhaktas of Ayodhyã.  This is my ãgnã.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Amdãvãd || 3 || 223 || 

AMDÃVÃD 
- 649 - 
Amdãvãd – 4 
The Avatãr Of Bhagvãn  
 
4.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Fãgan vad 3  [26
th
 March  1826],  Swãmi 
Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   mattress   with   a 
cylindrical  pillow  placed  on  a  decorated  bedstead  upon  a  square 
platform  facing  the mandir of Shree  Nar-Nãrãyan in  Amdãvãd.    He 
was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A  pink pãgh had  been  tied 
around  His  head,  and  tassels  of  roses  were  dangling  from  that pãgh.  
Bunches of roses had also been placed upon His ears.  In addition to 
this,  several  garlands  of  roses  were  hanging  around  His  neck,  and 
bãjubandh and gajarã of  roses  had been  tied  around  His  arms.    A 
sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had 
gathered before Him. 
 
4.2 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said  to  the muni-mandal and  the bhaktas, 
“Everyone, please listen to what I have to say.  A person should first 
develop a firm belief of the svarup of Bhagvãn.  What is Bhagvãn like?  
Well,  by  His  own  wish,  He  takes  birth  for  the kalyãn of  the jeevs.  
However, having taken birth, He is still beyond birth.  Despite having 
to die, Bhagvãn is still beyond ageing and death.  He is also niranjan, 
and He has no blemish of Mãyã.  In addition, He possesses a definite 
murti and   is svayam-prakãsh;   He   is Parbrahm, antaryãmi,   the 
supporter of countless millions of brahmãnds; and He is also beyond 
Akshar.    His  assuming  and  discarding  of  a  human  body  is  merely  an 
illusion – like  the  magic  of  a  magician.    Furthermore,  He  is  the 
controller  of  the  countless muktas,  including Akshar.    He  is  also  the 
lord  of  all.   That Shree  Purushottam  Nãrãyan,  after  first  taking  birth 
from  Dharma-Dev  and  Murti,  performs tap in Badrikãshram in  the 
svarup of Nar-Nãrãyan. 
 
4.3 
“That same Shree Nar-Nãrãyan assumes the svarup of Matsya, Kurma, 
Varãh, Vãman, Rãm,  and Krishna on  the  earth  for  the  fulfilment  of 
particular  tasks.    Then,  using  His  own  body,  He  helps  other  people 

AMDÃVÃD 
- 650 - 
eradicate their belief of being the body and accept the belief of being 
the svarup of brahm.  In this way, He makes His body and the bodies 
of  other  people  appear  to be  the  same.    For  example,  just  as  after  a 
thorn  is  used  to  remove  another  thorn,  both  thorns  are  discarded, 
similarly, Bhagvãn discards  His  body  like  other jeevs discard  theirs.  
This  event  is  explained  in  the  Mahãbhãrat  through  the  story  of 
Nrusinhji.  When He wished to leave His body, Nrusinhji, through His 
antaryãmi powers, inspired Shiv within his heart to take the svarup of 
a sharabh.    Then,  both Nrusinhji and  the sharabh fought  a  battle  in 
which Nrusinhji died.  Therefore, Bhagvãn independently, by His own 
wish, accepts a human body and abandons that human body. 
 
4.4 
“After hearing the charitras of Rushabh-Dev being  burnt  in  a  forest 
fire, and Shree Krishna Bhagvãn being killed by an arrow striking his 
foot,  the  minds  of  those  with a nãstik belief,  and  those  who  are  not 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn become confused.  They then allege that Bhagvãn 
too  passes  through  birth  and  death  just  like  themselves,  and  He 
receives a human body according to His karmas, and then leaves the 
human body by His karmas as well.  They also declare that only when 
Bhagvãn performs karmas that  do  not  cause  attachment  will  He  be 
released of His karmas and attain kalyãn. 
 
4.5 
“On the other hand, those who have an ãstik mind, and those who are 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn,  realise the  understanding  of  the nãstiks to  be 
wrong.    They  know  the  body  of Bhagvãn to  be  eternal;  and  that  the 
birth,  childhood,  youth,  old  age,  and  death  of Bhagvãn,  as  well  as 
whatever   other   bodily   qualities   He   may   display,   are   merely   an 
illusion.    This  is  because Kãl and Mãyã are  not  powerful  enough  to 
have any sort of influence on Bhagvãn’s body.  In fact, all changes that 
do appear to occur in Bhagvãn’s body are all due to His extraordinary 
powers.    Those  who  are bhaktas of Bhagvãn are  not  misled  by  this; 
whereas  the  minds  of  those  who  are  not bhaktas become  confused, 
just like worldly people become confused on seeing a magician’s acts.  
However, those who are aware of the magician’s techniques are not 

AMDÃVÃD 
- 651 - 
confused.    Similarly, Purushottam Shree Nar-Nãrãyan also assumes 
many    different    bodies    and    discards    them    like    the    magician.  
Therefore, this Shree Nar-Nãrãyan is the cause of all avatãrs. 
 
4.6 
“Those who assume death upon Shree Nar-Nãrãyan will  themselves 
have  to  undergo  countless  births.    The  suffering  of  passing  through 
the  cycle  of  8.4  million  different  life-forms  and  the  torments  of 
Yampuri are  indeed  endless.    Conversely,  those  who  realise Shree 
Nar-Nãrãyan to  be  beyond  ageing  and  death  will  be  released  from 
their karmas and the consequent cycle of births and deaths in the 8.4 
million life-forms.  Therefore, all satsangis and sãdhus of our Uddhav 
Sampradãy  should  not  assume  death  upon  the murtis of Bhagvãn – 
those that have occurred in the past, the current murti, or those that 
will occur in the future.  This principle should be noted by all.” 
 
4.7 
In this way, Shreeji Mahãrãj revealed Himself as the pratyaksha murti 
of Bhagvãn.    All  who  heard  this  talk  strengthened  their nishchay in 
Shreeji Mahãrãj in this same way. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Amdãvãd || 4 || 224 || 
 
 
Amdãvãd – 5 
Dharma, Arth, Kãm, And Moksh 
 
5.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Fãgan vad 4  [27
th
 March  1826],  Swãmi 
Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   mattress   with   a 
cylindrical pillow placed on a decorated bedstead on top of a square 
platform  north of  the mandir of Shree  Nar-Nãrãyan in  Amdãvãd.    He 
was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    Around  His  neck  was  a  large 
garland of roses, and tassels of flowers were hanging from His pãgh.  
With His right hand, He was turning a mãlã made from tulsi beads.  A 
sabhã of senior munis, as well as haribhaktas from various places, had 
gathered before Him. 

AMDÃVÃD 
- 652 - 
5.2
 Then,  Chhadidãr  Kuber  Sinh  asked,  “Mahãrãj,  what  is  the  most 
extraordinary characteristic of Shree Purushottam Nãrãyan?” 
 
5.3 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “No one except Shree  Purushottam  Nãrãyan 
can  control  the nãdis and prãns of  innumerable  beings  and  grant 
them  instant samãdhi;  nor  can  anyone  else  influence  hundreds  of 
thousands  of  people  by  having  them  abide  by niyams;  and  nor  does 
anyone else have the power to control Akshar and the muktas.  These 
are the extraordinary characteristics of Purushottam Nãrãyan.” 
 
5.4 
Then, Kuber Sinh asked a second question:  “Mahãrãj, there are 
countless  millions  of brahmãnds.    In  this brahmãnd,  the avatãr of 
Bhagvãn is  present  in Bharat-Khand,  in  Jambu-Dvip.    But,  please 
explain  how Bhagvãn gives kalyãn to  the  countless  beings  of  the 
other brahmãnds.” 
 
5.5 
Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “The very Bhagvãn that  resides  in  this 
brahmãnd is also the lord of all.  It is Bhagvãn who assumes a body in 
each brahmãnd for the sake of the kalyãn of countless beings.  These 
beings seek His refuge and consequently attain the holy feet of Shree 
Purushottam Nãrãyan in Akshardhãm.    That  is  the  answer  to  your 
question.” 
 
5.6 
Kuber Sinh then asked again, “Mahãrãj, what please identify what 
satsangis should abandon and what they should accept.” 
 
5.7 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  answered,  “They  should  abandon  all  desires  for 
worldly  objects.    Instead,  they  should  develop  desires  related  to 
Bhagvãn.  If they do have desires for wealth, they should think, ‘If we 
worship  Bhagvãn,  we  will  attain  gold  coins,  diamonds,  rubies,  jewels, 
and other invaluable things in the dhãm of Bhagvãn’.  However, in no 
way should they have desires for worldly objects.  If they have lustful 
desires,   they   should   think, ‘If  we  look  lustfully  towards  another 
woman, we will have to pass through the cycle of 8.4 million life-forms 

AMDÃVÃD 
- 653 - 
and suffer extensively.  Even dogs and donkeys indulge in this, whereas 
I have attained the pratyaksha svarup form of Purushottam.  It will be 
a great loss for me if He is displeased’.  After thinking in this way, they 
should abandon such lustful desires and should desire happiness that 
is related to Bhagvãn.  If they have love for the relatives of the body, 
they  should  also  abandon  it.    Instead,  they  should  develop  love 
towards the Bhagvãn’s sant.  They should accept this much. 
 
5.8 
“On the other hand, satsangis should abandon the sense of ‘I-ness’ 
towards the body and develop an attitude of a dãs towards Bhagvãn.  
If Bhagvãn or  His sant have  become  displeased  in  any  way  or  have 
disapproved of a person, then he should discard all cruel feelings that 
he  may  have  developed  towards Bhagvãn or  His sant.    Moreover,  he 
should  realise  his  own  mistake  and  accept  the gun of Bhagvãn and 
His sant.    In  this  way,  a  person  should  always  think  positively,  but 
never think negatively.  That is the answer to your question.” 
 
5.9 
Then,  Kuber  Sinh  asked  another  question:  “Mahãrãj, please explain 
the nature of dharma, arth, kãm, and moksh.” 
 
5.10 
Shreeji Mahãrãj smiled gently and said, “The nature of arth is  to 
accumulate wealth or to fulfil a person’s aim of moksh.    That  is  the 
nature of arth.  The nature of dharma is to use that wealth in satsang 
for the purpose of dharma; but, not spend it for other purposes.  That 
is the nature of dharma.  The nature of kãm is to have only one wife, 
to  have  physical  relations  with  her  only  at  the  appropriate  time,  to 
reject all women in the world by regarding them as a mother, sister, 
or daughter.  That is the nature of kãm.  Finally, the nature of moksh 
is to attentively follow all the niyams of satsang and keep unfaltering 
nishchay in Bhagvãn.  That is the nature of moksh.  That is the answer 
to your question.” 
 
5.11
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then retired to sleep. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Amdãvãd || 5 || 225 || 

AMDÃVÃD 
- 654 - 
Amdãvãd – 6 
The Cause Of All Avatãrs 
 
6.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Fãgan vad 6  [29
th
 March  1826],  Swãmi 
Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   mattress   with   a 
cylindrical  pillow  that  had  been  placed  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on 
top  of  a  square  platform  facing  the mandir of Shree  Nar-Nãrãyan in 
Amdãvãd.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white clothes.    Garlands  of 
roses  were  placed  around  His  neck,  and  tassels  of chameli flowers 
were  hanging  from  both  sides  of  His pãgh.    Bunches  of  roses  had 
been  placed  upon  both  of  His  ears.    In  addition  to  this,  Shreeji 
Mahãrãj had taken a large bunch of roses in His hand and was gently 
rubbing  it  around  His  face.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
6.2 
Then,  after  the  evening ãrti,  Kuber  Sinh  asked  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  a 
question:  “Mahãrãj, please reveal how nishchay in Bhagvãn that  a 
person has firmly established in his heart would never falter.” 
 
6.3 
Shreeji Mahãrãj first commented, “Everyone should hear the answer 
to this question, so please listen attentively.”  He then said, “If a 
person  knows  the  greatness  of  the pratyaksha svarup of Bhagvãn, 
then his belief never falters.  I shall now explain that greatness. 
 
6.4 
“All the avatãrs of Bhagvãn emerge  from  the  very Bhagvãn that  is 
present  in  this satsang.    He  is  the  cause  of  all  the avatãrs and  is  the 
antaryãmi of all.  It is Bhagvãn in Akshardhãm, who is radiant, full of 
countless powers, and eternally has a svarup.  He is also the lord of all 
the lords of the countless brahmãnds; He is even the cause of Akshar-
Brahm.    When  that Bhagvãn takes  birth  on earth  and  adopts  the 
behaviour  of Rushabh-Dev,  He  is  known  as Rushabh-Dev;  when  He 
accepts  the  divine  ways  of  the avatãr of Rãm,  He  is  known  as Rãm-
Chandra; and when He performs the charitras of Shree Krishna, He is 
known  as Shree Krishna.    In  this  way,  whichever  behaviour  of  the 
avatãrs can  be  seen  in Bhagvãn,  it  should  be  understood  that  all  the 

AMDÃVÃD 
- 655 - 
previous avatãrs of Bhagvãn have emerged from Him, and that He is 
the ultimate cause of them all.  If a person understands this, his belief 
never  falters.    But,  if  he  does  not  understand  this,  his  belief  may 
falter.  That is the answer to your question.” 
 
6.5 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then added, “Furthermore, that same Shree  Krishna 
Bhagvãn took  birth  as Shree  Nar-Nãrãyan from Dharma and Bhakti.  
Therefore,  realising  this  Shree  Nar-Nãrãyan  to  be  my svarup, I  have 
installed His murti for the first time here in Shree-Nagar.  Therefore, 
no  one  should  perceive  even  the  slightest  difference  between Shree 
Nar-Nãrãyan and myself.  It is He who is the dweller of Akshardhãm.” 
 
6.6 
Hearing Shreeji Mahãrãj say this, Kuber-Sinh asked further, “Mahãrãj, 
what  is  that Akshardhãm like?    Please  describe  it  and  the bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn that reside there.” 
 
6.7 
Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “It is Akshardhãm which  has  become  the 
dhãm of Shree Purushottam Nãrãyan to dwell in.  That Akshardhãm in 
the svarup of the dhãm of Bhagvãn is eternal in comparison to all the 
other Akshardhãms (the muktas who   have   become   like Akshar-
Brahm).  Within that Akshardhãm, there are several types of palaces.  
Each  palace  has  various  types  of  decorative  balconies  and  terraces.  
There  are  also  many  different  types  of  fountains  and  many  different 
types   of   gardens.      The   gardens   contain   innumerable   flowers   of 
innumerable species, and each one is radiant.  It is so beautiful that it 
cannot  be  compared  to  any  other dhãm.    It  is  also  called Golok.    In 
addition, its splendour is countless times more than the divine riches 
of countless other dhãms. 
 
6.8 
“That dhãm is  also  limitless.    Just  as  there  is  no  limit  to ãkãsh, 
regardless of the direction in which a person looks, similarly, there is 
no limit to Akshardhãm.  Whether a person looks above, below, or in 
the  four  directions,  there  is  no  boundary  to  the dhãm of Bhagvãn.  
This is because it is endless.  If a person were to try to reach its end, 

AMDÃVÃD 
- 656 - 
he   would   realise   that   it   is   endless.      Such   is   the   vastness   of 
Akshardhãm. 
 
6.9 
“Also, the objects within Akshardhãm are  all divya and  composed  of 
chaitanya.  Countless pãrshads, who are also radiant and have a divya 
svarup, reside  in  that dhãm.    They  are  forever  eager  for  the sevã of 
Bhagvãn, who is the antaryãmi of all life-forms.  It is the same lord of 
that dhãm – the   lord   of Akshar and   the muktas, Parbrahm 
Purushottam – who  is  present  here  in  this satsang.    Only  a  person 
who has such nishchay attains Akshardhãm.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Amdãvãd || 6 || 226 || 
 
 
Amdãvãd – 7 
Divine Characteristics Of Shreeji Mahãrãj 
 
7.1 
In  the Samvat year 1882,  on Fãgan vad 7  [30
th
 March  1826],  Swãmi 
Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was having the Vãsudev Mahãtmya read 
on  the medi above  the  gate  of  the mandir of Shree  Nar-Nãrãyan in 
Amdãvãd.    Then,  in  the  evening,  He  got  up  and  sat  facing  east  on  a 
decorated  bedstead  under  the  neem  tree  near  the  gate.    Around  His 
head, He had tied a pink pãgh, and tassels of roses had been inserted 
into the pãgh.  He was also wearing garlands of roses.  In addition to 
this,  He  was  wearing  a  white survãl and  had  covered  Himself  with  a 
thin,  white chofãl.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
7.2 
Then, Prãgji Davé asked, “Mahãrãj, by what means can a person’s 
mind   become   firmly   fixed   on   you   so   that   it   does   not   become 
adulterous by straying elsewhere?” 
 
7.3 
Shreeji Mahãrãj began by saying, “Please listen  as  I  answer  your 
question.”  He then continued, “By realising the greatness of Bhagvãn, 

AMDÃVÃD 
- 657 - 
a person’s mind becomes fixed on Him.  Now, I shall explain how that 
greatness should be understood. 
 
7.4 
“I had previously asked Rãmãnand Swãmi at Lãdhã Brãhman’s house 
in Piplãnã, ‘Are you truly Bhagvãn, or are you merely called Bhagvãn?’  
Rãmãnand  Swãmi  did  not  reply  then.    Later,  in Samvat 1869,  I  had 
fallen ill.  During my illness, I went to Kshir-Sãgar where Shesh-Shãyi 
Nãrãyan rests upon Shesh, and I saw Rãmãnand Swãmi there.  He was 
wearing   a   white dhoti and   had   covered   himself   with   a   white 
pachhedi.  I also saw many others sitting near the holy feet of Shesh-
Shãyi  Nãrãyan.    I  asked Nãrãyan, ‘Who is this Rãmãnand Swãmi?’  
Nãrãyan replied, ‘He is a knower of Brahm’.    After  He  said  this, 
Rãmãnand  Swãmi  merged  into  the  body  of Nãrãyan,  and  I  then 
returned to my physical body. 
 
7.5 
“Then, when I performed antar-drashti, I saw the source of the divine 
sound  of pranav.    While  I  was  looking  at  it, Nandishvar,  the  bull, 
approached me.  I mounted upon it and went to Shiv in Kailãs.  There, 
Garud arrived.  So, I mounted upon it and began to travel to Vaikunth 
and Akshardhãm.      However,   as Garud was   unable   to   fly   to 
Akshardhãm,   I   went   alone   to   the dhãm of Shree Purushottam 
Nãrãyan, which is beyond everything.  There, I saw that it was I who 
was Purushottam; I did not see anyone important, apart from myself.  
In  this  way,  I  travelled  to  these  places,  and  then  finally  returned  to 
my body. 
 
7.6 
“Then, when I looked within  again,  I  realised  that  I  am  the  creator, 
sustainer,  and  destroyer  of  all  the brahmãnds.    In  those  countless 
brahmãnds,  it  is  by  my  divine  light  that  countless Shivs,  countless 
Brahmãs,  countless Kailãs,  countless Vaikunths, Golok, Akshardhãm, 
as well as countless millions of other loks, are radiant. 
 
7.7 
“What am I like?  Well, if I were to shake the earth with the toe of my 
foot,  the  worlds  of  countless brahmãnds would  begin  to  shake.    It  is 

AMDÃVÃD 
- 658 - 
also  by  my  divine  light  that  the  sun,  the  moon,  and  the  stars  are 
radiant.   So,  if  a  person develops  the  belief  of my svarup in  this  way, 
his  mind  becomes  fixed  on  me – Bhagvãn – and  would  never  stray 
anywhere  else.    Moreover,  I  will  grant  my  supreme dhãm to  all  who 
come to my refuge and understand this.  In addition, I will make them 
antaryãmi,   and   powerful   enough   to   create,   sustain,   and   destroy 
brahmãnds.    However,  after  receiving  such  powers,  a  person  should 
not  think, ‘I alone my great’,  and  neglect  and murti of Shree  Nar-
Nãrãyan.  Instead, a person should realise ‘It is by compassion of Shree 
Nar-Nãrãyan that I have attained such greatness’.” 
 
7.8
 In this way, Shreeji Mahãrãj answered the question. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Amdãvãd || 7 || 227 || 
 
 
Amdãvãd – 8 
The Prãyshchit For Anger  
 
8.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Fãgan vad 8  [31
st
 March  1826],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  serving  food  to  the sãdhus in  their 
residential   hall,   north   of   the mandir of Shree   Nar-Nãrãyan in 
Amdãvãd.    He  had  tied  a  beautiful,  white pãgh around  His  head  and 
was  wearing  a  white khes.    He  has  also  placed  a khes over  His  left 
shoulder and had tied one of its ends around His waist.  Also, a large 
garland of roses was hanging around His neck. 
 
8.2 
While  serving lãdus to  the sãdhus, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “A sãdhu 
should  abandon  anger  in  all  respects.    What  is  anger  like?    Well,  it 
destroys all noble qualities such as gnãn, the performance of tap, and 
the chanting of the name of Bhagvãn. 
 
8.3 
“Now, I shall identify the motives from which anger arises.  Anger 
arises  when sãdhus are  engaged  in  a  question-answer  discussion 

AMDÃVÃD 
- 659 - 
amongst  themselves,  or  if  there  is  an  argumentative  discussion.    It 
can  also  arise  from  the  giving  and  taking  of  particular  objects,  or 
when   lecturing   someone,   or   when   a   person   tries   to   maintain 
prejudice towards his shishya.  Also, anger can arise when a person is 
insulted,  out  of  jealousy,  over  where  to  sit  or  not  to  sit,  or  even 
because of the unequal distribution of Bhagvãn’s prasãd.  In this way, 
there are many reasons for anger to arise. 
 
8.4 
“If a senior sãdhu or  a  junior sãdhu becomes  angry,  he  should  first 
perform dandvat pranãm to  whomever  he  has  expressed  his  anger 
upon, and then please that person by speaking pleasant words to him 
in a pleading, gentle, and sincere tone.  This is my ãgnã. 
 
8.5 
“If anyone  else,  due  to  a  cruel  intellect,  has  an  offensive  thought 
towards  a sãdhu,  he  should  confess  and  voice  his  offensive  thought 
by saying, ‘Mahãrãj, I have thought offensively of you’.  Then, in order 
to be forgiven for that thought, he should fold his hands and pray for 
forgiveness. 
 
8.6 
“If a sãdhu becomes  angry  with  a grahastha bhakta,  then  he  should 
verbally  pray  and  bow  down  to  him  from  a  seated  position;  but  he 
should  not  perform dandvat  pranãm before  him.    If sãnkhya-yogi 
women become angry amongst themselves or on karma-yogi women, 
they too should pray verbally and bow down from a seated position.  
On  the  other  hand, sãnkhya-yogi men  should  do  as  the sãdhus do  if 
they become angry upon anyone.   
 
8.7 
“In general, whenever we become angry with someone, we should 
realise that person to be a bhakta of our lord, Shree Nar-Nãrãyan, and 
instantly   abandon   our   arrogance,   bow   down   to   Him,   and   pray.  
However, a person should never maintain an outward perspective by 
believing, ‘I am senior and better than him; whereas he is not senior 
but a mere junior’.    A  person  should  not  entertain  such  a  feeling.    In 
fact,   even   our ishta-dev, Shree Nar-Nãrãyan,   does   not   keep   any 

AMDÃVÃD 
- 660 - 
arrogance  or  anger;  so  as  His  followers  and  the members  of  this 
Uddhav   Sampradãy,   we   should   abandon   all   forms  of   anger   and 
arrogance. 
 
8.8 
“Shree Nar-Nãrãyan will   be   greatly   pleased   upon   anyone   who 
performs  the prãyshchit that  I  have  prescribed  for  becoming  angry.  
As a result, that person’s antah-karans will be purified, and all of his 
vicious natures, such as kãm, krodh, abhimãn, lobh, mãn, and matsar, 
will  be  destroyed.    Conversely,  a  person  who  does  not  perform 
prãyshchit for becoming angry should be thought of as a snake, not as 
a bhakta of Bhagvãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Amdãvãd || 8 || 228 || 
 
 
|| End of Shree Amdãvãd Prakaran ||

ASHLÃLI 
- 661 - 
|| SHREE SWÃMINÃRAYAN VIJAYTETRÃM || 
 
VACHANÃMRUT 
Shree Ashlãli Prakaran 
 
Ashlãli – 1 
The Three Types Of Bhaktas 
 
1.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Chaitra sud 2  [9
th
 April  1826],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  left  Amdãvãd  with  great  festivity  and 
reached  Ashlãli  in  the  evening.    There,  He  was  accommodated  in  a 
mango  grove  north  of  the  village  and  was  seated  on  a  platform.    He 
was dressed entirely in white clothes.  Also, He was wearing beautiful 
garlands  of  flowers  around  His  neck,  and  tassels  of  flowers  were 
hanging from His pãgh.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
1.2 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then said to Muktãnand Swãmi, Brahmãnand Swãmi, 
and  all  the  other sãdhus, “Please listen, I wish to say something.  
Whoever incompletely realises the nature of Bhagvãn suffers a great 
loss.    That  person  cannot  experience  the  true  bliss  of Purushottam 
Bhagvãn – who we also call Shree Krishna, Shree Vãsudev, Shree Nar-
Nãrãyan, Parbrahm,  and Shree  Nãrãyan – nor  can  he  become  an 
ekãntik bhakta.    Therefore,  a  person  should  strengthen  his gnãn of 
Bhagvãn by great association with an ekãntik bhakta of Bhagvãn who 
has gnãn.  This is because, without the true gnãn of Bhagvãn even the 
prajãpatis and other creators of the universe have to repeatedly take 
birth  along  with  the  creation,  and  then  ultimately  merge  back  into 
Mãyã.    However,  they  do  not  attain Akshardhãm,  the dhãm of Shree 
Purushottam Bhagvãn.      The   reason   for   this   is   a   flaw   in   their 
understanding.” 
 
1.3 
Then,  all  the munis asked, “Mahãrãj, please explain this flaw in their 
understanding.” 

ASHLÃLI 
- 662 - 
1.4 
Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Very well.  Please listen as I explain their flaws.  
First of all, they consider the strength of their own actions but not the 
strength of a person’s refuge in Bhagvãn to  be  instrumental  in  their 
kalyãn.    Secondly,  they  do  not  realise  that  becoming akshar-rup and 
serving Shree  Purushottam  Nar-Nãrãyan is  in  itself kalyãn.  Their 
third   mistake   is   that   they   believe   the   innumerable avatãrs of 
Bhagvãn, such as Rãm and Krishna, to be a part of Bhagvãn.  Fourthly, 
at  the  time  of  a  previous  death,  they  had  a  thought  in  their  minds, 
‘How are the brahmãnds created?  It would be good to see for once’.  
Seeing  their  desire, Bhagvãn engaged  them  in  the  creation  of  the 
brahmãnds.  They will only become brahm-rup and attain the dhãm of 
Bhagvãn when  they  realise  true gnãn by  great  association  with  an 
ekãntik bhakta of Bhagvãn; and only then will they become eternally 
happy.  Therefore, a bhakta of Bhagvãn should desire nothing but the 
sevã of Bhagvãn.” 
 
1.5 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then explained, “There are  three  types  of bhaktas; 
and  they  can  be  recognised  by  their  characteristics:    A  person  who 
worships Bhagvãn with the intention of earning powers to create the 
world  is  known  as aishvaryãrthi.    He  is  a kanishth bhakta.    A  person 
who  worships Bhagvãn only  to  experience  the ãtmã is  known  as  a 
kaivalyãrthi.  He is a madhyam bhakta.  However, a person who has a 
constant  the  singular  determination  for  the sevã of  the pratyaksha 
svarup of Purushottam Bhagvãn is known as a bhagvat-nishtãrthi.  He 
is an uttam bhakta and best bhakta of all.  As all of us have the belief 
of    the pratyaksha    svarup of Shree Nar-Nãrãyan,    we    are    all 
undoubtedly the best.” 
 
1.6 
All  who  had  gathered  in  the sabhã were  overjoyed  hearing  these 
words of Shreeji Mahãrãj. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Ashlãli || 1 || 229 || 
 
 
|| End of Shree Ashlãli Prakaran ||

JETALPUR 
- 663 - 
|| SHREE SWÃMINÃRAYAN VIJAYTETRÃM || 
 
VACHANÃMRUT 
Shree Jetalpur Prakaran 
 
Jetalpur – 1 
The Dvait Philosophy 
 
1.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  about  an  hour-and-a-half  after  sunrise  on 
Chaitra sud 3  [10
th
 April  1826],  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj 
was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  that  had  been  placed  under  an 
ãsopãlav tree in the mansion in Jetalpur.  He was dressed entirely in 
white clothes.  Around His neck, He was wearing several garlands of 
guldãvadi flowers, tassels of dolariyã flowers were dangling from His 
pãgh,  and  two karnikãr flowers  had  been  placed  upon  both  of  His 
ears.    Also,  He  was  playing  with  a  beautiful  lemon  in His  hands.    A 
sabhã of sãdhus,  as  well  as satsangi men  and  women  from  various 
places, had gathered before Him. 
 
1.2 
Then, addressing the entire sabhã, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Everyone 
in this world accepts some philosophy or other.  There are two major 
doctrines:    One  is  the  Dvait  philosophy  and  the  other  is  the  Advait 
philosophy.    Please  explain  which  philosophy  should  be  accepted  by 
a mumukshu.” 
 
1.3 
Then,  Purushottam  Bhatt  said  in  reply,  “Mahãrãj,  in  the  Advait 
philosophy, by believing their ãtmã to be Bhagvãn, people behave as 
they  please.    As  a  result  of  this,  they  fall  from  the  path  of kalyãn.  
Therefore, a mumukshu should accept the Dvait philosophy.” 
 
1.4 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then raised a doubt.  He questioned, “According to 
the Dvait philosophy, jeev, ishvar, and Mãyã are satya.  But, as long as 
Mãyã persists, how can the jeev attain kalyãn?” 
 
1.5 
Purushottam Bhatt replied, “A person attains kalyãn by performing 
pure karmas.” 

JETALPUR 
- 664 - 
1.6 
Again, Shreeji Mahãrãj raised a doubt:  “The two types of karmas, 
nivrutti and pravrutti,  become  merged  into Mãyã in  the  form  of 
sushupti.    What  is  that  state  of sushupti like?    Well,  just  as  no  one  is 
capable  of  conquering Mount  Lokã-Lok,  similarly,  no jeev is  capable 
of  conquering  the sushupti.    Above  that,  is Mãyã in  its  state  of 
equilibrium,   and   it   is   extremely   vast.      No jeev can   conquer   it.  
Therefore, the means to go beyond Mãyã is as follows:  When the jeev 
comes into contact with the pratyaksha svarup of Shree Purushottam 
Bhagvãn – who  is  beyond Mãyã,  and  who  is  the  destroyer  of Mãyã 
and  all karmas – or  His sant who  has  attained Bhagvãn,  then  by 
accepting their refuge, the jeev can go beyond Mãyã.” 
 
1.7 
After  delivering  this  talk,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  went  up  into  the  mansion 
for  His  meal.    After  dinner,  He  returned  and  sat  on  a  decorated 
bedstead  under  the ãsopãlav tree.    Then,  looking  lovingly  at  all  the 
sãdhus and bhaktas, He said, “In the beginning, when no one honours 
a  person,  imagine  what  his  nature  is  like.    Then,  when  a  hundred 
people  begin  to  follow  him,  his  pride  becomes  of  a  different  type.  
Also,  when  one  thousand  people,  or  ten  thousand  people,  or  ten 
million  people  follow  him,  his  pride  becomes  of  a  different  type 
altogether.  Then, if he becomes like Brahmã, or Shiv, or Indra, and if 
he  is  wise,  he  would  realise, ‘My greatness is not due to this status’.  
What  is  it  due  to?    Well,  greatness  is  due  to  the ãtmã, and  due  to 
association  with  a sant.    This  is  because  even  though  those  like 
Brahmã, Shiv, and Indra are all great, they still crave for the dust from 
the feet of a sant. 
 
1.8 
“So, where does the greatness of a sant lie?  Allow me to explain.  The 
greatness of  a sant is  not  due  to  wealth,  or  objects,  or  any  kingdom; 
his  greatness  is  due  to  his bhakti and upãsanã of Bhagvãn.    Also,  the 
sant has ãtmã-nishthã.  It is due to these qualities that he is great. 
1.9 
“If a person cannot realise this, then he should develop a belief within 
his ãtmã that he should be deeply attached to a sant who has attained 
the pratyaksha svarup of Bhagvãn,  and  he  should  believe  only  that 

JETALPUR 
- 665 - 
sant to  be  his  own  self.    However,  a  person  may  doubt, ‘How is the 
master-servant  relationship  maintained?’  Well,  take  the  example  of 
Gãlav Rãjã.  He wanted to perform a sacrifice for which he specifically 
required  white  horses  with  black  ears.    It  so  happened  that  those 
black-eared horses were at the home of Varun.  But, since that region 
was  beyond his  reach,  he  called upon Garud.    Then,  having  mounted 
Garud,  he  went  there  and  brought  back  the  horses.    So,  does  this 
mean that Gãlav Rãjã’s sevã towards Garud diminished?  No, it did not 
diminish.    Similarly,  the  purpose  of  being  deeply  attached  to  a sant, 
who  is  a  knower  of Brahm,  is  that  he  has  the  ability  of  passing 
through the eight barriers (jad prakruti).  That is the reason for being 
deeply attached to such a sant.” 
 
1.10 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  added  that  all  should  remember  this  principle, 
as it is the very life of everyone. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Jetalpur || 1 || 230 || 
 
 
Jetalpur – 2 
The Characteristics Of A Yati 
 
2.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  in  the  evening  of Chaitra sud 4  [11
th
 April 
1826], Swãmi Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a decorated 
bedstead  that  had  been  placed  in  the  middle  of  the  courtyard  of  the 
mandir of Shree Baldevji in Jetalpur.  He was dressed entirely in white 
clothes, and tassels of dolariyã flowers decorated His pãgh.  Also, He 
had  a  handkerchief  in  His  left  hand  and  was  turning  a mãlã of tulsi 
beads  with  His  right  hand.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
2.2 
Then,  Brahmãnand  Swãmi  bowed  before  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  and  asked, 
“Mahãrãj, please reveal who can be called yati?” 
 
2.3 
Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “A person who firmly follows brahm-chãrya and 
has conquered all of his indriyas should be known as a yati; a person 

JETALPUR 
- 666 - 
who  is  like Hanumãnji and  Lakshmanji  should  be  known  as  a yati.  
When Hanumãnji went to Lankã in search of Sitãji on Rãmchandraji’s 
instruction, he looked at the faces of all the women in Lankã in order 
to  recognise  her.    As  he  continued  looking,  he  thought, ‘This is not 
Jãnkiji...This  one  is  not  Jãnkiji’.  Then, while he was thinking this, he 
saw   Mandodari   and   thought, ‘Could  this  be  Jãnkiji?’  But,   then 
concluded in his mind, ‘Because of her separation from Rãmchandraji, 
Jãnkiji’s body would never be so plump, and she would never be able to 
sleep so soundly’.  With this thought in mind, Hanumãnji turned back.   
 
2.4
 “Then, he doubted in his mind, ‘I am a yati; but, could a flaw have 
developed in me by seeing all these women?’  But, then he reconciled to 
himself, ‘How  can  there  be  any  flaw  in  me?    It  is  because  of 
Rãmchandraji’s instruction to find Sitãji that I had to look at all these 
women’.    He  also  thought, ‘By Rãmchandraji’s grace, no disturbance 
has  arisen  in  my  indriyas  and  in  my  vrutti’.      Thinking   this,   he 
wandered everywhere to look for Sitãji.  In this way, like Hanumãnji, 
a  person  whose antah-karans remains  pure  despite  being  faced  by 
such vicious influences is called a yati. 
 
2.5 
“Moreover, while searching for Sitãji in  the  forest  after  she  was 
abducted, Rãmchandraji and  Lakshmanji  came  to  the  place  where 
Sugriv was seated on the Fatak Shilã.  They informed Sugriv, ‘We have 
come  here  because  Jãnkiji  has  been  abducted.    So,  if  you  know  of  her 
whereabouts,  please  tell  us’.  Sugriv  replied, ‘Mahãrãj, I did hear the 
cries, “O Ram!  O Ram!” coming from the sky.  Also, some items of 
jewellery, which are tied in a piece of cloth, were dropped from above.  I 
have kept them with me’.  Then, Rãmchandraji requested, ‘Please bring 
them here so that we can see them’.  Rãmchandraji took the pieces of 
jewellery  from  Sugriv  and  showed  them  to  Lakshmanji.    First,  He 
showed jewellery worn on the ears, and bracelets worn on the arms, 
but  Lakshmanji  did  not  recognise  any  of  these.    Then,  He  showed 
some  anklets.    Lakshmanji  immediately  exclaimed, ‘Mahãrãj, I have 
never seen Jãnkiji’s body.  In fact, except for her feet, I have not seen any 
other part of Jãnkiji’s body.  The only reason I have been able to 

JETALPUR 
- 667 - 
recognize the anklets is because whenever I used to go and bow at her 
feet every evening, I would see her ankles’.  In this way, despite the fact 
that  for  fourteen  years  Lakshmanji  was  in  their  service,  with  the 
exception  of Jãnkiji’s feet,  he  had  never  intentionally  seen  her  body.  
Such a person should be known as a yati.” 
 
2.6 
Having said this, Shreeji Mahãrãj commented, “This Brahmãnand 
Swãmi is also like that.” 
 
2.7 
In  this  way,  as  the sabhã was  listening,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  greatly 
praised Brahmãnand Swãmi as being a yati. 
 
2.8 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj went to the outskirts of the village.  There, He 
sat  on  a  decorated  bedstead  that  had  been  placed  on  top  of  a  low, 
broad  platform  at  the site  where  the yagnas had  been  performed.   A 
sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had 
gathered before Him. 
 
2.9 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “Please  begin  a  question-answer 
discussion.” 
 
2.10 
Then, Ãshji-Bhãi Patel asked, “Mahãrãj, what is the nature of the jeev?  
Please reveal it to me as it is.” 
 
2.11 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  explained,  “The jeev is achhedhya, abhedhya, 
avinãshi, chetan,  and  the  size  of  an  atom.    You  may  also  ask, ‘Where 
does the jeev reside?’  Well,  it  resides  in  the hruday-ãkãsh,  and  while 
staying  there  it  performs  different  actions.    From  there,  when  it 
wants  to  see,  it  does  so  through  the  eyes;  when  it  wants  to  hear 
sounds,  it  does  so  through  the  ears;  it  smells  all  types  of  smells 
through the nose; it tastes through the tongue; and through the skin, 
it  experiences  the  pleasures  of  all  feelings.    In  addition,  it  produces 
thoughts through  the man,  it  thinks  through  the chitt,  and  it  makes 
decisions  through  the buddhi.    In  this  way,  through  the  ten indriyas 

JETALPUR 
- 668 - 
and  the  four antah-karans,  it  indulges  in  all  the vishays.    It  pervades 
the  entire  body  from  head  to  toe,  yet  is  distinct  from it.    This  is  the 
nature  of  the jeev.    It  is  due  to  the  grace  of  the pratyaksha  svarup of 
Purushottam that a bhakta is able to perceive the jeev as it actually is.  
On  the  other  hand,  others  cannot  even  begin  to  realise  the  nature  of 
the jeev.” 
 
2.12 
Having answered  the  question  in  this  way  and  pleasing  everyone, 
Shreeji Mahãrãj bid “Jay Sachidãnand” to the sabhã and retired to the 
mansion to sleep. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Jetalpur || 2 || 231 || 
 
 
Jetalpur – 3 
Overcoming Vãsnã 
 
3.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  in  the  early  morning  of Chaitra sud 5  [12
th
 
April 1826], Swãmi Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj arrived in the garden 
on  the  western  side  of  the  mansion,  the  place  of  His  residence,  in 
Jetalpur.    Under  a  large bordi tree  within  the  garden,  He  was  sitting 
facing  east  on  a  decorated  bedstead,  with  a  large,  cylindrical  pillow, 
that had been placed on a platform.  He was dressed entirely in white 
clothes.      He   was   also  wearing   garlands  of champã, borsali,   and 
guldãvadi flowers   around   His   neck,   and   tassels of chameli and 
dolariyã flowers  were  hanging  from  His pãgh.    Bunches  of hajãri 
flowers  had  been  placed  upon  His  ears.    In  addition  to  this,  He  was 
playing   with   a   pomegranate   and   a   lemon   with   both   hands.  
Muktãnand  Swãmi,  Brahmãnand  Swãmi,  and  other munis, as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him in a sabhã. 
 
3.2 
Shreeji Mahãrãj first thought for a while, and then said, “Everyone 
please listen, as I wish to speak to you.  For bhaktas of Bhagvãn, there 
is nothing worse than having impure desires.  This is because bhaktas 
who  have  such  impure  desires,  even  if  they  stay  near  me,  cannot  be 

JETALPUR 
- 669 - 
happy.    In  fact,  before  engaging  in  the  worship  of Bhagvãn,  they 
asked, ‘Mahãrãj, please keep us near you’.  However, because they did 
not eradicate their impure desires, they are miserable.” 
 
3.3 
Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, how are those impure 
desires eradicated?” 
 
3.4 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  explained,  “The  method  for  eradicating  impure 
desires is as follows:  Firstly, whenever a person entertains a thought 
which disobeys the rules of dharma that have been laid down by me, 
or  whenever  he  thinks  cruelly  of  a sãdhu or  a grahastha,  he  should 
repeatedly  chant ‘Nar-Nãrãyan, Swãminãrãyan’ aloud.    Secondly,  he 
should   offer   to Bhagvãn the   nine   types   of bhakti coupled   with 
knowledge  of  His  greatness  and  the  observance  of dharma.    As  a 
result, Bhagvãn resides in his heart and destroys the impure desires.  
In  fact,  just  as Bhagvãn freed  the  elephant  from  the  crocodile’s 
mouth, in the same way, this method that I have just revealed to you 
will eradicate your impure desires. 
 
3.5 
“Now, I shall tell you another method which will benefit all of you, so 
please  listen.    A  person  should  never  intentionally  disobey  the  rules 
of dharma related to his vartmãns.  If a person does so unknowingly, 
he   should   immediately   perform prãyshchit for   disobeying   the 
vartmãns. 
 
3.6 
“In addition, a person should realise his own self to be the witness; ‘I 
am  the  ãtmã,  which  is  full  of  chaitanya;  it  is  beyond  all  thoughts  and 
reason.   This  body,  which  is  accompanied  by  the  mind,  is  not  actually 
my true svarup’. 
 
3.7 
“Furthermore, if Bhagvãn smiles  at  someone,  or  if Bhagvãn calls 
someone, or if He performs any other sort of action, he should never 
develop  hatred  towards  Him.    A  person  should  absorb  this  form  of 
understanding.    However,  someone  may  feel, ‘I  have  worshipped 
Mahãrãj  a  lot,  and  I  have  also  performed  a  great  deal  of  sevã;  still, 
Mahãrãj  does  not  talk  to  me.    Instead,  He  talks  to  others  a  lot.    So,  I 

JETALPUR 
- 670 - 
might as well worship Bhagvãn while sitting at home’.  In this way, he 
develops  hatred  towards Bhagvãn.    In  that case, I  could  also  believe, 
‘What does this person have to do with me?’  As a result, that person’s 
future would be uncertain.  However, I myself do not look at anyone’s 
avgun.  In fact, my nature is such that I always look only at people’s 
gun. 
 
3.8 
“Now, I shall tell you how that bhakta should  perceive gun and 
eradicate avgun.    If  he  thinks, ‘What was I like before I came into 
satsang?    Well,  I  experienced  kãl,  karma,  birth,  death,  and  the  cycle of 
births and deaths.  So, how can I develop hatred towards Bhagvãn who 
has  freed  me  from  all  of  that,  who has  made  me  fearless,  and  who  has 
helped me progress by bestowing noble qualities upon me?  How can I 
ignore  His  wishes  and do as I please?’  A bhakta becomes  happy  only 
when he stops hating Bhagvãn by thinking in this way. 
 
3.9 
“In fact, with the body, nothing is greater than to do as Bhagvãn likes.  
That in itself is bhakti.  In fact, only by doing this does a person attain 
Bhagvãn.    That  is  why  vicious  natures,  such  as mãn, irshyã, kãm, 
krodh, and lobh, are all obstacles on the path of kalyãn and should be 
discarded. 
 
3.10 
“Of those vicious natures, mãn is absolutely the worst of all.  Just look, 
a person who has a minor flaw in any other vartmãn still manages to 
survive in satsang, whereas those who had mãn have never been able 
to  survive.    Therefore, sãdhus must  never  allow  any  lapse  in  the 
observance   of   the vartmãns and   remaining   without mãn.      Be 
extremely  vigilant.    Believe  your  own  self  to  be  distinct  from  your 
body.    Offer bhakti to Shree  Purushottam attentively  and  thoroughly.  
Constantly  engage  in bhajan and smaran of Bhagvãn;  its  bliss  will 
equal the bliss of actually having the darshan of Bhagvãn. 
 
3.11 
“Also, in our satsang, a person who is educated in the shãstras is not 
necessarily  great.    Who  should  be  considered  great?    Well,  a  person 
who  considers  all  fourteen loks to  be  as  insignificant  as  a  blade  of 
grass,  due  to vairãgya;  a  persons  who  has  firm  belief  of Bhagvãn as 

JETALPUR 
- 671 - 
He is, just as he has firm attachment to his body; and a person who is 
oblivious to the world in the jãgrat state just as he is oblivious to the 
world  in  the  state  of  sushupti  sleep – such  a  person  is  great  in  our 
satsang.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Jetalpur || 3 || 232 || 
 
 
Jetalpur – 4 
Sevã Of A Bhakta 
 
4.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on  the Chaitra sud 6  [13
th
 April  1826], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress,  and 
leaning  on  a  large,  cylindrical  pillow,  that  had  been  placed  in  the 
south-facing  balcony  of  the  mansion  in  Jetalpur.    He  was  wearing  a 
white pãgh, adorned with a bunch of small flowers, on His head, and 
He  had  covered  Himself  with  a pachhedi of  white  flowers.    He  was 
wearing  a  white khes with  a  border  of  silver  threads.    In  addition  to 
this, His entire body had been smeared with sandalwood paste mixed 
with saffron.  Also, garlands of guldãvadi flowers were placed around 
His  neck.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various 
places, had gathered before Him. 
 
4.2 
Then,  addressing  the  entire sabhã, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “In this lok, 
the jeev attains kalyãn only  by  the  following  means; nishchay in  the 
pratyaksha   svarup of Bhagvãn,   His darshan,   and   His   constant 
remembrance.  After all, it is said in the Shreemad Bhãgvat that even 
those who insulted Bhagvãn, such as Kans, Shishupãl, and Dantvakra, 
attained kalyãn since  all  of  them  had  constant  remembrance  of 
Bhagvãn.    Therefore, kalyãn is  attained  by  constantly  remembering 
Bhagvãn;   and  since  all  of   you   possess  such   remembrance,   your 
kalyãn is assured. 
 
4.3 
“Having said that, you should still follow all the rules of dharma 
prescribed  by  me  for  as  long  as  you  are  conscious  of  your  bodies.  

JETALPUR 
- 672 - 
You  may  claim, ‘If a person has attained Bhagvãn and constantly 
remembers Him, why does he need to observe vartmãn?’  In  reply  to 
that,  consider  the  difference  between  a  person  who firmly  observes 
the vartmãn and  a  person  who  is  slacking  in  his  observance.    Allow 
me  to  explain  that  difference  to  you.    Even  though  both  remember 
Bhagvãn,  the  person  who  does  not  follow niyams can  only  earn 
kalyãn for himself, but he cannot help other jeevs attain kalyãn.  Also, 
he does not become an ekãntik bhakta, nor does he attain the nirgun 
dhãm of Bhagvãn.    Even  though  he  does  not  have  to  undergo  births 
and deaths, he cannot stay in the satsang. 
 
4.4 
“However, all of you are the best type of bhaktas.  In fact, sãdhus such 
as yourselves, who observe niyams, are of a totally different category.  
For that reason, whoever feeds you sincerely will earn the rewards of 
performing  millions  of  sacrifices  and  will  ultimately  attain kalyãn; 
and  whoever  touches your  feet  will  be  freed of  their  sins  committed 
in  millions  of  past  lives.    Anyone  who  kindly  offers  you  clothes  will 
also  attain  ultimate kalyãn.    The  rivers  and  lakes  into  which  you  dip 
your  feet  become  like  places  of  pilgrimage,  and  any  tree  that  you 
have  sat  under  or  eaten  fruits  of  will  also  definitely  benefit.    If 
someone  devoutly  performs  your darshan,  or  is  someone  devoutly 
bows  before  you,  then  all  of  his  sins  are  destroyed.    Moreover, 
whomever  you  talk  to  about Bhagvãn and  whomever  you  inspire  to 
follow niyams related to dharma will attain kalyãn.  All the actions of 
sãdhus like  yourselves,  who  observe niyams,  lead  to moksh.    This  is 
because  you  have  the  firm  refuge  of  the pratyaksha svarup of Shree 
Nar-Nãrãyan Rushi.  That Shree Nar-Nãrãyan Rushi is always present 
in your sabhã. 
 
4.5 
“You may claim, ‘If we have a firm refuge of Bhagvãn, why do mãyik 
qualities still pervade us?’  Then, let me say that it takes me no time at 
all  to  eradicate  the shad-urmi (six  physical  and  emotional  feelings) 
and  the mãyik qualities  from  all  of  you.    In  fact,  it would  take  me  no 
time to enable all of you to recall your countless previous lives and to 

JETALPUR 
- 673 - 
be  able  to  perform  the  creation,  sustenance,  and  destruction,  of 
countless brahmãnds.    Nevertheless,  I  have  kept  you  like  this  and 
have suppressed  your  powers  because  it is  my  wish  to  do so, and  to 
allow  you  to  attain  the  bliss  of  the pratyaksha svarup of Bhagvãn.  
What  is  more,  all  of  you  have  currently  attained Shree  Purushottam 
who   is pratyaksha in   the svarup of Shree   Nar-Nãrãyan Rushi.  
Therefore,  abandon  all  doubts  and  happily  engage  in  worship.”  
Saying this, Shreeji Mahãrãj became silent. 
 
4.6 
Then, Ãshji-Bhãi asked a question:  “Mahãrãj, how is it that a person 
attains kalyãn by keeping hatred towards Bhagvãn?  Please tell us.” 
 
4.7 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “Once  Drupad  Rãjã  wished  to  have  his 
daughter, Draupadi, married.  So that she could select a bridegroom, 
he arranged a grand function in which he invited all the kings.  Dron-
Ãchãrya also came, as did the Pãndavs.  Then, all the kings took turns 
to  try  and  pierce  the  fish,  but  none  were  able  to  do  so.    Then, 
Yudhishthir said, ‘I will pierce the fish’.  Having said this, Yudhishthir 
took   aim.      Dron-Ãchãrya   asked   him, ‘Can  you  see  this  sabhã?’  
Yudhishthir  replied, ‘Yes, I can see it’.    Again,  Dron-Ãchãrya  asked 
him, ‘Can you see your body?’  Yudhishthir  replied, ‘Yes, I can see it’.  
Then,  Dron-Ãchãrya  said, ‘You will not be able to pierce the fish’.    In 
this  way,  four  of the  brothers  were  unable  to  pierce  the  fish.    Then, 
Arjun  stepped  forward.    He  picked  up  his  bow  and  took  aim.    Dron-
Ãchãrya  asked  him, ‘Can you see this sabhã?’  Arjun  replied, ‘No, I 
cannot see the sabhã, and I cannot even see the fish.  Instead, I only see 
the bird attached to the fish’.  Hearing this, Dron-Ãchãrya said, ‘Focus 
on its head’.    Arjun  adjusted  his  aim  and  said, ‘Now I do not see even 
the bird; I see only its head’.    Finally,  Dron-Ãchãrya  said, ‘Now take 
your shot’.    Arjun  then  pierced  the fish’s head.  In this way, if all of a 
person’s vruttis are  focused  on  the svarup of Bhagvãn,  then  he  can 
attain kalyãn even with a feeling of hatred towards Bhagvãn. 
 
4.8 
“For example, when the vruttis of  those  like  Shishupãl  and  Kans 
became completely engrossed in Shree Krishna, they attained kalyãn.  

JETALPUR 
- 674 - 
But, if a person does not know how to hate Bhagvãn in this way then 
he is sent to Narak.  Instead, it is much easier to engage in the bhakti 
of Bhagvãn.    However,  a  person  who  worships Bhagvãn with  such  a 
cruel  intellect  will  always  be  called  demonic,  and  cannot  be  called  a 
bhakta. 
 
4.9 
“Therefore, if a person wants to abandon the evil practices of the 
demons   and   join   the   ranks   of   Dhruv,   Prahlãd, Nãrad,   and   the 
Sanakãdik,  then  engaging  in  the  worship  of Bhagvãn by  offering 
bhakti is far better.” 
 
4.10 
Having  heard  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  speak  in  this  way,  everyone  in  the 
sabhã experienced profound bliss. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Jetalpur || 4 || 233 || 
 
 
Jetalpur – 5 
The Wish Of Bhagvãn 
 
5.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  approximately  four-and-a-half  hours  after 
sunset on Chaitra sud 7 [14
th
 April 1826], Swãmi Shree Sahajãnandji 
Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   wooden   bedstead   facing   north   in   the 
courtyard south of the palace in Jetalpur.  He was dressed entirely in 
white  clothes.    He  had  tied  a pãgh made  from  a  thin,  white  cloth 
around  His  head.    He  had  also  covered  Himself  with  a chãdar,  and 
was  wearing  a  white dhoti.    A sabhã of munis,  as well  as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
5.2 
After  thinking for a moment, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Everyone please 
pay  attention;  today  I  wish  to  talk  to  you about  things  as  they  really 
are.  Specifically, there is nothing greater than worshipping Bhagvãn.  
This   is   because   everything   happens   according   to   the   wish   of 
Bhagvãn.    In  fact,  at  this  moment,  even  the  wishes  of  this sabhã can 

JETALPUR 
- 675 - 
be fulfilled.  By the grace of Shree Nar-Nãrãyan, even my wish can be 
fulfilled.  Allow me to elaborate on this. 
 
5.3 
“Whatever I wish in my mind is fulfilled in this world.  If I wish, ‘May 
he attain a kingdom’, then he will attain a kingdom.  If I wish, ‘May he 
lose his kingdom’, then his kingdom will be lost.  If I wish, ‘Let there be 
this much rainfall here at his moment’, then it will definitely rain here; 
and if I wish, ‘Let there be no rainfall here’, then it will not rain here.  
Also  if  I  wish, ‘May he attain wealth’,  then  he  does  so;  and  if  I  wish, 
‘May she conceive a son’,  then  she  mothers  a  son;  and  if  I  wish, ‘May 
she not have a son’,  then  she  definitely  does  not.    If  I  wish, ‘May he 
contract a disease’, then he will contract a disease; and if I wish, ‘May 
he not contract a disease’,  then  he  will  not  contract  a  disease.    So, 
when I wish for something, it actually happens that way. 
 
5.4 
“Then, you will argue that a satsangi still has to endure joy and pain – 
he  contracts  diseases,  he  sometimes  loses  all  of  his  wealth  and 
luxuries,  and  despite  working  extremely  hard  all  his  life,  he  still 
remains poor.  Well, the explanation for all of his efforts not earning 
rewards  is  that it  occurs  in  direct  proportion  to  his  slackness  in 
engaging  in  the  worship  of Bhagvãn.   Bhagvãn definitely  wishes  to 
assist  him.    In  fact,  if  His  own bhakta is  to  face  the  pain  of  a shuli, 
Bhagvãn will reduce that pain by having him pricked by a mere thorn 
instead.    As  far  as  I am concerned,  I feel, ‘If a satsangi is to suffer the 
pain  of  a  scorpion  sting,  may  I  suffer  that  pain  a  thousand  times 
instead,  but  a  bhakta  should  be  relieved  of  that  pain and  remain 
happy’.    This  is  the vardãn I  had  requested  from  Rãmãnand  Swãmi.  
That is why I pray, ‘May good be bestowed upon all’. 
 
5.5 
“Also, I am always trying to keep the vrutti of people’s minds fixed on 
Bhagvãn.    This  is  because  I  know  everything  about  the  past,  the 
present, and the future.  In fact, while sitting here, I know everything 
that  happens;  even  when  I  was  in  my  mother’s  womb,  I  knew 
everything; and even before I came into my mother’s womb, I knew 

JETALPUR 
- 676 - 
everything.  This is because I am Bhagvãn – Shree Nar-Nãrãyan Rushi.  
Even if a person who has committed extremely great sins comes and 
accepts   my   refuge   and   abides   by   the niyams,   then   in   his   last 
moments,  I  will  grant  him  my darshan and  take  him  to Bhagvãn’s 
Akshardhãm. 
 
5.6 
“Presently, the lord of Akshardhãm, Shree Purushottam, being born of 
Dharma-Dev   and   Murti-Devi,   takes   birth   in   Badrikãshram   and 
performs tap in  the svarup of Shree Nar-Nãrãyan Rushi.    It  is  to 
destroy  the  beliefs  of  the  hypocrites,  to  destroy  any  traditions  of 
adharma and  nurture  the  traditions  of dharma,  and  to  increase 
bhakti coupled with dharma, gnãn, and vairãgya on this earth in this 
Kali-Yug that Shree Nar-Nãrãyan Rushi was born to Dharma-Dev and 
Bhakti in the svarup of Nãrãyan-Muni – who is presently seated in the 
sabhã.” 
 
5.7 
By saying this, Shreeji Mahãrãj filled His bhaktas with joy. 
 
5.8 
Continuing,  He  said,  “The  only  purpose  behind  my  repeatedly 
mentioning  the  predominance  of Shree Nar-Nãrãyan  Dev is  because 
that same Shree Nar-Nãrãyan, who is Shree Krishna Purushottam and 
who  resides  in Akshardhãm,  Himself  sits  daily  in  this sabhã.    This  is 
why  I  speak  of  His  predominance.    So,  realising  my svarup,  I  have 
spent  hundreds  of  thousands  of  rupees  on  constructing  a shikhar-
bandh mandir in Amdãvãd.  That is why I first installed the murtis of 
Shree Nar-Nãrãyan in  that mandir.  That Shree  Nar-Nãrãyan is  the 
lord of countless brahmãnds.  Of these, He is especially the lord of this 
Bharat-Khand.      Those   people   in Bharat-Khand who   ignore   this 
pratyaksha  svarup of Shree Nar-Nãrãyan by  worshipping  other devs 
are  like  adulterous  women  who  leave  their  husbands  and  become 
attached  to  other  lovers.   Even  the Shreemad  Bhãgvat  mentions  that 
Shree Nar-Nãrãyan is the lord of this Bharat-Khand. 
 
5.9 
“Furthermore, it is for the kalyãn of  the jeevs that  I  have  taken  birth 
on earth along with the sãdhus.  Therefore, if you abide by my words, 

JETALPUR 
- 677 - 
I  will  take  all  of  you  to  the dhãm from  which  I  have  come.    So,  you 
should  also  realise, ‘We have already attained kalyãn’.    Furthermore, 
if you keep firm faith in me and do as I say, then even if you were to 
suffer  extreme  suffering,  or  even  if  you  were  to  face  the  distress  of 
seven consecutive famines, I will protect you from them.  Even if you 
were  made  to  suffer  miseries  from  which  there  seems  to  be  no  way 
out,  I  will  still  protect  you – but  only  if  you  thoroughly  follow  the 
dharma of  my satsang,  and  only  if  you  continue  practising satsang.  
However,  if  you  do  not,  you  will  suffer  terrible  miseries,  and  I  will 
have nothing to do with you. 
 
5.10 
“This time, I  have  left  no  deficiency  in  any  matter  whatsoever.    Just 
look,  I  have  performed  several yagnas in  the  village  of  Jetalpur.    I 
have also been visiting here for so many years; I must have bathed in 
this lake along with my sãdhus thousands of times; I have must have 
visited  each  home  in  this  village  of  Jetalpur  a  hundred  times,  and  I 
have  also  taken  meals  in  every  home.    In  this  way,  I  have  made  this 
village and its outskirts even more sacred than Vrundãvan.” 
 
5.11 
As  Mahãrãj  was  saying  this,  a  large  ball  of light  appeared  in  the  sky, 
and then split into three distinct balls.  They then hovered about the 
mansion for a while and then disappeared. 
 
5.12 
Seeing this phenomenon, everyone asked, “Mahãrãj, what was that?” 
 
5.13 
Shreeji Mahãrãj revealed, “Everyday, Brahmã, Vishnu,  and Shiv come 
for my darshan and the darshan of this sabhã of sãdhus.  But today, by 
the wish of Bhagvãn, you have been able to see them along with their 
vimãns.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Jetalpur || 5 || 234 || 
 
 
|| End of Shree Jetalpur Prakaran ||

GADHADÃ III 
- 678 - 
|| SHREE SWÃMINÃRAYAN VIJAYTETRÃM || 
 
VACHANÃMRUT 
Shree Gadhadã Antya Prakaran 
 
Gadhadã III – 1 
The Shikshãpatri 
 
1.1 
In the Samvat year 1882, on Vaishãkh vad 11 [1
st
 June 1826], Swãmi 
Shree Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   mattress   with   a 
cylindrical  pillow  that  had  been  placed  upon  a  beautifully  coloured, 
decorated cot.   The  bedstead  rested  on  the  high  veranda  outside  the 
west-facing  rooms  in  the  courtyard  of  the mandir of Shree  Vãsudev-
Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed 
entirely   in   white   clothes.      Beautiful   tassels   of mogrã flowers 
decorated the large, white pãgh that was tied around His head.  Also, 
a garland of mogrã flowers was hanging around His neck, and a string 
of   flowers   decorated   His   wrists.      A sabhã of munis,   as   well 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
1.2 
Then,    Shreeji    Mahãrãj    asked    the paramhans,  “What  is  the 
understanding of a bhakta who experiences no obstacles in his bhakti 
towards Bhagvãn, despite facing unpleasant circumstances?” 
 
1.3 
The paramhans replied  according  to  their  understanding,  but  they 
were unable to provide a precise answer. 
 
1.4 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “A person who  worships Bhagvãn needs 
firm vairãgya, and ãtmã-nishthã.  If vairãgya is lacking, then when he 
obtains desired objects, he will also develop love for those objects in 
the  same  way  that  he  has  love  for Bhagvãn.    If ãtmã-nishthã is 
lacking,   then   when   the body   experiences   pain   or   pleasure,   that 
bhakta’s vruttis become   disturbed.      Then,   he   develops   love   for 
anything  he  considers  to  be  full  of  happiness,  and  hates  anything  he 

GADHADÃ III 
- 679 - 
considers  to  be  full  of  misery.    In  this  way,  his  mind  becomes 
polluted.  Therefore, a bhakta of Bhagvãn needs extremely firm ãtmã-
nishthã as well as extremely firm vairãgya. 
 
1.5 
“This is because, by vairãgya,  all  worldly  forms  except  for Bhagvãn’s 
murti are proven false; and through ãtmã-nishthã, worldly pleasures 
and miseries are proven false.  A person who does not have the ãtmã-
nishthã and vairãgya, even though he has attained nirvikalp samãdhi, 
experiences  happiness  and  peace  only  while  he  remains  in samãdhi.  
But,   when   he   comes   out   of samãdhi,   he   becomes   attached   to 
pleasurable object upon seeing them, as Nãrãyan-Dãs did.” 
 
1.6 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “A bhakta of Bhagvãn either  has  the 
strength of gnãn or the strength of love towards Bhagvãn.  Of these, a 
person  who  has  the  strength  of gnãn understands  the  greatness  of 
Bhagvãn and  cannot  stay  without Bhagvãn even  for  a  moment.    For 
example,    Jhinã-Bhãi,    Dev-Rãm,    and    Prabhã-Shankar    have    the 
strength  of gnãn.    Such bhaktas who  understand  the  greatness  of 
Bhagvãn should  be  known  as  having  the strength of gnãn.    A bhakta 
who has love for Bhagvãn, like the gopis of Vraj, should be known as 
having the strength of love. 
 
1.7 
“Of these, a person who has the strength of gnãn realises Bhagvãn as 
being antaryãmi and  believes, ‘Bhagvãn does not make judgements 
based  on  what  He  hears  from  others.    Instead,  Bhagvãn  recognises  a 
bhakta’s strengths and speaks to him accordingly, but He does not act 
based on the advice of others’.    Conversely,  a  person  who  believes, 
‘Bhagvãn lectures me based on someone else’s words, even though I am 
not at fault’, has no gnãn of Bhagvãn. 
 
1.8 
“Even in worldly life we notice that a person who has selfish motives 
of gaining something from another will never see the other person’s 
faults.  This is because his love is based on self-interest.  Similarly, if a 
person has the self-interest that Bhagvãn will free him from the fear 
of  births  and  deaths,  then  he  will  never  perceive  faults  in Bhagvãn.  

GADHADÃ III 
- 680 - 
But, a person who perceives faults in Bhagvãn by thinking, ‘Bhagvãn 
changes His opinion based on the prompting of others’, has neither the 
strength of gnãn nor the strength of love.” 
 
1.9 
Having  said  this,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said  to  the  senior paramhans, 
“Please reveal which of these two is your strength.” 
 
1.10 
All the paramhans replied, “We have the strength of gnãn.” 
 
1.11 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj continued, “A person who has the strength of 
love will do anything for his loved one, even that which is not fit to be 
done.    For  example,  in  the  world,  thieves  have  love  for  their  wives 
and children.  However, when they go to steal, they kill other people 
and  pass  on  the  money  to  their  own  family.    In  reality,  that  thief  is 
quite  cruel,  but  since  he  has  love  for  his  own  family,  he  is  not  cruel 
towards them.  Similarly, a person who has love for Bhagvãn and His 
bhaktas can  never  become  angry  at  or  jealous  of Bhagvãn or  His 
bhaktas,  and  in  no  way  does  he  perceive  faults  to  them.    A  person 
who has such love can be said to have the strength of love.  A person 
with neither the strength of gnãn nor the strength of love is said to be 
fickle and unpredictable.” 
 
1.12 
Having delivered this talk, Shreeji Mahãrãj returned to His residence. 
 
1.13 
On  the  evening  of  that  same  day,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  seated  on  a 
mattress with a cylindrical pillow placed on a decorated bedstead on 
the veranda outside the east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr.  
He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    He  was  also  wearing  a 
garland of mogrã flowers around His neck.  A sabhã of munis, as well 
as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered  before  Him.    Some 
sãdhus were  singing kirtans to  the  accompaniment  of  a dukad and 
sarodã. 
 
1.14 
When the sãdhus had finished singing, Shreeji Mahãrãj addressed the 
sabhã:  “The Shikshãpatri which I have written should be read daily 

GADHADÃ III 
- 681 - 
by all of my followers – tyãgi sãdhus and brahm-chãris, as well as all 
male  and  female grahasthas.    Those  who  do  not  know  how  to  read 
should  listen  to it  daily;  and  those  who  do  not  have  the  facility  to 
listen   to   it   should   worship   it   daily.      I   have   stated   this   in   the 
Shikshãpatri itself.  A person should do upvãs on the day he fails to do 
any of the three.  This is my ãgnã.” 
 
1.15 
Then,  everyone  promised  to  follow  this ãgnã of  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  by 
saying, “O Mahãrãj, we will do as you have said.” 
 
1.16 
Hearing   this,   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   became   extremely   pleased.      He 
embraced  all  the sãdhus and brahm-chãris and  imprinted  His  holy 
footprints on the chests of all the satsangis. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III || 1 || 235 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 2 
Understanding Bhagvãn’s Greatness 
 
2.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on  the  evening  of Jyeshth sud 6  [11
th
 June 
1826],  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  low, 
wooden   seat   in   the   courtyard   of   the mandir or Shree   Vãsudev-
Nãrãyan  in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  wearing  a 
white khes and had covered Himself with a white chãdar.  He had also 
tied  a  black-bordered,  white pãgh around  His  head,  and  tassels  of 
mogrã flowers  had  been  inserted  in  the pãgh.    A sabhã of munis,  as 
well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
2.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj posed a question:  “A person  sees  that  the 
world  is  perishable  and  that  the chaitanya separates  from  the  body 
and  leaves  it;  however,  the  predominance  of  the  world  does  not 
diminish from his heart.  Despite thoroughly believing Bhagvãn to be 
an  ocean  of  bliss,  his  mind  still  does not  focus  on Bhagvãn.    Also, 

GADHADÃ III 
- 682 - 
satsang does  not  become  predominant  in  his  heart  and  he  cannot 
eradicate  love  for  wealth,  women,  and  other  pleasures  of  the  world.  
What can be the reason for this?” 
 
2.3 
Then, Muktãnand Swãmi replied, “The person lacks vairãgya.    As  a 
result,  he  cannot  eradicate  the  predominance  of  the  world  from  his 
heart, and nor can he develop love for Bhagvãn.” 
 
2.4 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then clarified, “It is true that there is a deficiency in 
vairãgya,  but  it  appears  to  me  that  the  strength  which  forms  as  a 
person practices satsang, remains as it is forever; a different strength 
does   not   develop.      By   practicing satsang,   that   strength   may   be 
nourished,  but  the  strength  itself  remains  unchanged.    Whenever  a 
person’s strength is being formed, his mind becomes disturbed in the 
process of formation.  Just as the mind of an extremely lustful person 
is  disoriented  by  lust,  and  the  mind  of  an  extremely  angry  person  is 
disoriented by anger, and the mind of an extremely greedy person is 
disoriented by greed, similarly, a person’s mind becomes disoriented 
in   the   process   of   developing   his   strength.      Then,   during   the 
disturbance,   whichever   strength   develops   is   the   strength   that 
remains.    Therefore,  a  person  who  is  wise  should  realise  his  own 
strength.    When  a person  is  disturbed  by  the  influence  of  vicious 
natures, such as lust or anger, if he thinks about his own strength, the 
influence of the vicious natures is lessened. 
 
2.5 
“In addition, just as a grahastha feels  regretful  if  he  experiences 
lustful  thoughts on  seeing  his  attractive  mother,  sister,  or  daughter, 
similarly,  a  person  should  feel  regretful  when  objects  other  than 
satsang become  predominant  in  his  heart.    If  a  person  does  not  feel 
similarly regretful on entertaining thoughts for indecent objects, then 
satsang does not remain predominant in his heart.   
 
2.6 
“In  fact,  the  reward  of  all  spiritual  activities  is satsang.    In  the 
eleventh skandh of  the  Shreemad  Bhãgvat, Shree Krishna Bhagvãn 
says  to  Uddhav, ‘I am not as pleased by ashtãng-yog,  thoughts of 

GADHADÃ III 
- 683 - 
sãnkhya,  scriptural  study,  tap,  tyãg,  yog,  yagna,  and  vrats,  as  I  am 
pleased by satsang’.  In fact, it appears to me that all sanskãrs a person 
has   gathered   from   previous   lives   have   been   attained   through 
association with a sat-purush.  Even today, those who obtain sanskãrs 
do  so  through  association  with  a sat-purush.    A  person  who  has 
attained  the  association  of  such  a sat-purush,  but  is  still  unable  to 
understand  matters  as  they  really  are  should  be  known  to  have  an 
extremely dull intellect. 
 
2.7 
“As for me, I consider this sabhã of satsangis to be far greater than the 
sabhãs in Shvet-Dvip, Golok, Vaikunth, and Badrikãshram; and I see all 
of  these bhaktas as  being  extremely  luminous.    I  take  oath  on  this 
sabhã of sãdhus that there is not even the slightest lie in this matter.  
Why  do  I  have  to  take  oath  in  this  way?    Well,  it  is  because  not 
everyone understands such divinity, nor can they see it; that is why I 
have to take an oath. 
 
2.8 
“Therefore, even after attaining this satsang – which is  rare  for  even 
Brahmã – affection for objects other than Bhagvãn still remains.  This 
is  because  the  person  has  not  developed  as  firm  a  belief  for  the 
pratyaksha  svarup of Bhagvãn as  he  has  for  the  non-pratyaksha 
svarup of Bhagvãn.  That is why the Shrutis state, ‘If a person develops 
belief  in  his  guru – who  is  the  pratyaksha  svarup  of  Bhagvãn – in  the 
same  way  that  he  has  belief  in  the  non-pratyaksha  devs,  then  as  a 
result,  he  attains  all  the  purushãrths  (dharma,  arth,  kãm,  and  moksh) 
which  are  described as attainable’.    In  fact,  when  he  attains  the 
company  of  such  a sant,  he  has  attained  He  who  was  to  be  attained 
after  death,  while  still  alive;  he  has  attained  that  which  is  called 
moksh or kalyãn, while being alive. 
 
2.9 
“What I have just explained to  you  may  appear  to  be  simple,  but  in 
reality, it is extremely subtle.  A person who is currently behaving in 
this way will understand that this is extremely subtle; but others will 
not even be able to understand it.  That is how subtle it is.” 

GADHADÃ III 
- 684 - 
2.10 
After delivering this talk, Shreeji Mahãrãj bid “Jay Sachidãnand” to 
everyone and then returned to His residence.   
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III || 2 || 236 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 3 
Compassion And Love 
 
3.1 
In  the Samvat year  1883,  on Ashãdh vad 1  [20
th
 July  1826],  Swãmi 
Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was at His residence in Dãdã Khãchar’s 
darbãr in   Gadhadã.      On   that   day,   Harji  Thakkar   invited  Shreeji 
Mahãrãj to sanctify his house.  Shreeji Mahãrãj sat on a mattress with 
a  cylindrical  pillow  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside 
the east-facing rooms.  Harji Thakkar then performed pujã of Shreeji 
Mahãrãj  with  sandalwood  paste  mixed  with  saffron.    In  this  way, 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  sat  facing  east  and  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.    Garlands  of mogrã flowers  were  hanging  around  His  neck, 
gajarã of mogrã flowers  were  tied  around  both  arms,  and  tassels  of 
mogrã flowers  beautifully  decorated  His pãgh.    A sabhã of munis,  as 
well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
3.2 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  the  entire sãdhu-mandal, “Compassion 
and  love  reside  instinctively  in  the  heart  of  a bhakta of Bhagvãn.    Of 
the  two,  the  nature  of  love  is  like  honey;  it  sticks  everywhere.    The 
nature  of  compassion  is  that  a  person  feels  compassion  towards 
everything.  When Bharatji felt compassion for a deer, he had to take 
birth  from  the  womb  of  a  deer  in  his  next  life.    Moreover,  a  person 
who  is  compassionate  certainly  develops  love  towards  those  he  has 
compassion for. 
 
3.3 
“There are two methods for eradicating compassion and love:  ãtmã-
nishthã and vairãgya.  Of these, ãtmã-nishthã is such that nothing else 
can penetrate it.  The nature of vairãgya is that it shows all objects to 
be   perishable.      Therefore,   through ãtmã-nishthã and vairãgya, 

GADHADÃ III 
- 685 - 
compassion and  affection  are  destroyed.    In  addition,  the  influences 
of the sthul, sukshma, and kãran bodies are destroyed, and then only 
brahm-sattã remains.    But  then,  does a bhakta have  compassion and 
love  for Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas?    Or  does  he  not?    That  is  the 
question.” 
 
3.4 
Muktãnand    Swãmi,    Shuk    Muni,    Nityãnand    Swãmi,    and    other 
paramhans answered according to the extent of their understanding.  
However, none could give a satisfactory reply to Shreeji Mahãrãj’s 
question. 
 
3.5 
So, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Allow me to answer.  The answer is that by 
gnãn and vairãgya,  the chaitanya is  freed  from  the mãyik influences 
of  the  three  bodies,  the  three  mental  states,  and  the  three gun of 
Mãyã.    It  is  then  pure,  and  not  the  slightest  trace  of mãyik influence 
remains.  For example, consider the analogy of an oil lamp’s flame.  
Only when a wick-holder, some oil, and a wick unite can the flame of 
an  oil  lamp  be  seen  and  recognised.    But,  when  the  combination  of 
these three components is broken, the flame can no longer be seen by 
anyone,  nor  can  it  be  recognised  by  anyone.    Therefore,  only  when 
those components are combined is it seen and recognised.  Similarly, 
when  all  the mãyik influences  are  overcome  by gnãn and vairãgya, 
the jeevãtmã remains as pure brahm-sattã. 
 
3.6 
“Now, the jeevãtmã is  invisible  to  the  mind  and  speech,  and  it  is  not 
perceivable  by  any  of  the indriyas.    However,  with  time,  if  it  attains 
the knowledge of Bhagvãn by associating with a pure sampradãy, and 
it fully understands the greatness of Bhagvãn and His bhaktas, then it 
is freed from all mãyik influences.  Then, that jeevãtmã also becomes 
brahm-rup.    However,  compassion  and  love  for Bhagvãn and  His 
bhaktas still  remains  forever.    To  carry  the  analogy  of  the  oil  lamp 
further, when the combination of its components is broken, its flame 
remains  within  the  air,  where  it  cannot  be  perceived  by  any  of  the 
indriyas.  However, the fragrance or foul smell that had pervaded that 
flame  is  not  destroyed.    Even  though  the  air  is  more  superior  to  the 

GADHADÃ III 
- 686 - 
flame, it still becomes pervaded by fragrant or foul smells.  Likewise, 
by gnãn and vairãgya,  the jeevãtmã is  freed  from mãyik influences, 
but  the  impression  of satsang is  not  lost.    Even  though  it  becomes 
brahm-rup,  like Nãrad,  the Sanakãdik,  and  Shukji,  it  behaves  with 
intense  compassion  and  love  for Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas.    The 
following verses illustrate this: 
 
parinishthitopi nairgunya uttama-shloka-leelãya 
gruheeta-cheta rãjarshe akhyanam yad-adheetavan 
O King (Parikshit)!  Despite being perfectly poised in the nirgun state, having 
been attracted by the leelãs of Bhagvãn, I (Shukdevji) studied the Shreemad 
Bhãgvat. 
 
harer-gunãkshipta-matir-bhagavãn bãdarãyanihi 
adhyagãn-mahad-ãkhyãnam nityam vishnu vishnu-jana-priyaha 
Honourable (Shukdevji) – son of Vyãs, to whom bhaktas of Vishnu are very 
dear – was attracted by the gun of Bhagvãn, and therefore constantly studied 
the great Shreemad Bhãgvat. 
 
ãtmãrãmãsh-cha-munayo... 
Despite being engaged in the ãtmã and having overcome all improper natures, 
the munis still offer selfless bhakti to Bhagvãn because He possesses such divya 
qualities. 
 
prãyena Munayo rãjan... 
O King [Parikshit]!  Although the munis had no need for the rules of moral 
conduct and had attained the nirgun state, they still engaged themselves in 
praising the glory of Bhagvãn. 
 
 “The Geetã also states: 
 
brahma-bhootaha prasannãtmã na shochati na kãnkshati 
samaha sarveshu bhooteshu mad-bhaktim labhate parãm 
A person, who has become brahm-rup remains joyful, grieves nothing, desires 
nothing, behaves equally with all beings and attains my supreme bhakti. 
 
3.7 
“In this way, many verses promote the view that bhaktas of Bhagvãn 
who  have  shed mãyik influences  and  have  become brahm-rup by 

GADHADÃ III 
- 687 - 
gnãn and vairãgya,  still  have  compassion  and  love  for Bhagvãn and 
His bhaktas.    On  the  other  hand,  a  person  who  is  not  a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn,  but  has  overcome mãyik influences  by ãtmã-nishthã and 
vairãgya alone  and  behaves  as  the ãtmã,  has  been  influenced  by 
kusang during  the  process  of  realising Bhagvãn,  who  has only ãtmã-
nishthã and do not have upãsanã of Bhagvãn.  As a result, he does not 
develop  compassion  and  love  for bhaktas of Bhagvãn.    Just  as  a  foul 
smell  lingers  in  the  air  and  in  fire,  similarly,  the  impressions  of 
kusang, which cannot be overcome by any means, lingers within him. 
 
3.8 
“For example, Ashvatthãmã was brahm-rup, but he was influenced by 
kusang.    Therefore,  he  did  not  develop  compassion  or  love  for Shree 
Krishna   Bhagvãn or   His bhaktas,   the   Pãndavs.      Similarly,   the 
impressions  of kusang do  not  disappear  in  a  person  who  has  only 
knowledge  of  the ãtmã,  even  though  he  becomes brahm-rup;  nor 
does  he  develop  compassion  and  love  for Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas.  
However, for a bhakta of Bhagvãn, even though mãyik influences are 
overcome, intense compassion and love for Bhagvãn and His bhaktas 
increase.    But,  in  no  way  are  compassion  and  love  ever  lost;  they 
always remain.” 
 
3.9 
After delivering this talk, Shreeji Mahãrãj bid “Jay Sachidãnand” to 
everyone and then returned to His residence. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III || 3 || 237 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 4 
Bãdhitãnu Vrutti 
 
4.1 
In the Samvat year 1883, on Shrãvan sud 3 [6
th
 August 1826], Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  facing  north  on  a  mattress 
with a cylindrical pillow that had been placed on the veranda outside 
the medi of His residence in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He 
was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 

GADHADÃ III 
- 688 - 
4.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Even though a bhakta of Bhagvãn may 
possess gnãn and vairãgya,  and  even  if  by  the  force  of  a  thought 
process  the bhakta has  overcome  affection  for mãyik objects  that 
cause  him  bondage,  until  he  attains nirvikalp samãdhi, bãdhitãnu 
vrutti still remains within. 
 
4.3 
“Until a bhakta of Bhagvãn attains nirvikalp samãdhi – even  though 
he  may  possess gnãn and vairãgya,  and  by  the  force  of  a  thought 
process  has  overcome  affection  for mãyik objects  that  cause  him 
bondage – bãdhitãnu  vrutti remains  within  him.    Due  to  this,  he 
doubts, ‘Maybe  attachment  for  my  mother,  father,  wife,  children, 
wealth,  relatives,  body,  or  property  still remains!’  He  remains  fearful 
in this way.  For example, a brave warrior, even though he has killed 
all of his enemies, still occasionally becomes frightened by even those 
dead  enemies;  even  if  he  sees  them  in  his  dreams,  he  becomes 
frightened.      Similarly,   due   to bãdhitãnu   vrutti,   even   a bhakta 
possessing gnãn is  afraid  of  the  bondage  of  worldly  objects  that  he 
has  proved  false  from  within  and  from  which  he  has  severed  all 
affection.  At some time, if he remembers the money he possessed, or 
his  wife  or  other  objects,  he  becomes  fearful  in  his  mind  and  thinks, 
‘What if they cause bondage?’  In this way, the recalling of objects that 
have been falsified from within is called bãdhitãnu vrutti. 
 
4.4 
“Bãdhitãnu  vrutti is  overcome  when nirvikalp samãdhi is  attained.  
Then, that person becomes oblivious of eating and drinking, day and 
night,  pain  and  pleasure.    But,  when  he  withdraws  from nirvikalp 
samãdhi and  enters savikalp samãdhi, bãdhitãnu  vrutti still  remains.  
As a result of the influence of that bãdhitãnu vrutti, when that bhakta 
contracts  a  fever  or  is  at  the  moment  of  death,  he sometimes  recalls 
other   objects   besides Bhagvãn.      At   that   time,   he   may   babble 
meaninglessly;   he   may   even   say   words   like, ‘Mother!    Father!’  
Hearing   this,   a   person   who   does   not   understand   the   nature   of 
bãdhitãnu vrutti,  will  perceive  faults  in  that bhakta by  thinking, ‘He 
was called a bhakta of Bhagvãn; so, why does he speak like this at the 

GADHADÃ III 
- 689 - 
time of death?’  Such faults are perceived without knowing the nature 
of bãdhitãnu vrutti. 
 
4.5 
“In the world many sinful people die with full consciousness.  Also, a 
soldier  or  a  Rãjput  who  has  injured  his  body  may  die  while  being 
fully  conscious.    That  being  so,  will  a vimukh who  dies  with  full 
consciousness  still  attain kalyãn,  despite  being  a vimukh?    Of  course 
not;  he  will  certainly  be  sent  to Narak.    Conversely,  regardless  of 
whether  a bhakta of Bhagvãn dies  while  engaged  in  the  chanting  of 
Bhagvãn’s name,  or  in  a  disturbed  state  due  to  the  influence  of 
bãdhitãnu vrutti, bhakta still reaches the holy feet of Bhagvãn.” 
 
4.6 
On  the  evening  of  that  same  day,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  the 
veranda  outside  the medi of  His  residence.    He  was  dressed  entirely 
in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of sãdhus,  as  well  as haribhaktas from 
various places had gathered before Him. 
 
4.7 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  asked  the  senior paramhans, “Please describe 
how  the jeev,  which  resides  within  the  body,  is  present  in  one 
location, and how it pervades the entire body.” 
 
4.8 
The paramhans answered according to their understanding, but none 
were able to satisfactorily answer Shreeji Mahãrãj’s question. 
 
4.9 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “In the body, just as food is transformed 
into semen, similarly, in the heart, the five bhuts are transformed into 
a  disc  of  flesh,  within  which the jeev resides.    The jeev clings  to  this 
disc  of  flesh  like  a  torch  made  of  rags  that  is  set  alight  after  being 
immersed in oil.  Also, just as fire pervades an iron nail, similarly, the 
jeev actually   resides   in   the   disc   of   flesh,   and   by   consciousness 
pervades the entire body.  Therefore, regardless of where pain is felt 
in the body, it is the jeev itself that feels the pain; so, the jeev cannot 
be said to be separate from the pleasures and pains of the body. 
 
4.10 
“However, some may argue, ‘The jeev is luminous, whereas the disc of 
flesh  and  the  body  have  no  light.    So,  how  can  they  be  said  to  have 

GADHADÃ III 
- 690 - 
combined?’  The answer to this is that just as without the combination 
of oil, a wick-holder and a wick, a flame cannot hover in space on its 
own,  similarly,  without  associating  with  the  disc  of  flesh  the jeev 
cannot   remain  alone.      Just  as   fire – which  is  distinct   from   the 
container, the oil and the wick – cannot be destroyed by breaking just 
the container, in the same way, the jeev does not die with the death of 
the  body  even  though  it  pervades  the  disc  of  flesh  and  the  body.  
Although  the jeev does  experience  pleasure  and  pain  along  with  the 
body,  it is  not  perishable like  the  body.   So,  the jeev is indestructible 
and luminous, and it also pervades the body. 
 
4.11 
“Furthermore, if an oil lamp is placed at one location in a mandir, its 
flame  predominantly  pervades  the  wick;  and  secondarily,  it  also 
pervades   the   entire   building.      In   the   same   way,   the jeev also 
predominantly  resides  in  and  pervades  the  disc  of  flesh  that  is  a 
product of the five bhuts; and secondarily, it resides in and pervades 
the  entire  body.    Moreover, Bhagvãn resides  within  the jeev as  a 
witness.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III || 4 || 238 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 5 
Bhakti Coupled With The Knowledge Of Bhagvãn’s Greatness 
 
5.1 
In the Samvat year 1883, on Bhãdarvã sud 11 [12
th
 September 1826], 
Shreeji Mahãrãj was sitting on a mattress with a cylindrical pillow on 
the veranda outside the west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr 
in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    He  was  also 
wearing  a  garland  of mogrã flowers  around  His  neck.    Tassels  of 
mogrã flowers decorated His pãgh, and gajarã of mogrã flowers were 
tied  around  His  arms.    A sabhã of  the munis,  as  well as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 

GADHADÃ III 
- 691 - 
5.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Someone please ask a question.” 
 
5.3 
So, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, of the various types of bhakti 
offered  to Bhagvãn,  which  type  of bhakti does  not  encounter  any 
obstacles, and which type does encounter obstacles?” 
  
5.4 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “In  the  third skandh of   the   Shreemad 
Bhãgvat, within the Kapil Geetã, Devhuti says to Kapilji,  
 
yan-nãmadheya-shravanãnu-keertanãd-yat-prahvanãd-yat-smaranã-dapi kvachit 
shvãdopi sadyaha savanãya kalpate katham punas-te bhagavan-nu darshanãt 
If even a ‘shvapach’ (a vile person who eats dog-meat) becomes immediately 
suitable for performing yagnas (perfectly purified) by merely hearing and 
repeating the name of Bhagvãn, by bowing to Bhagvãn, and by remembering 
Bhagvãn, then what can be said of your darshan? 
 
aho bata shavpachoto gareeyãn yaj-jiha-vãgre vartate nãma tubhyam 
tepus-tapas-te juhuvuhu sasnur-ãryã bhramã-nuchur-nãma grunanti ye te 
How amazing!  Even a ‘shvapach’ (a vile person who eats dog-meat) becomes 
great if your name is on the tip of his tongue (he chants Bhagvãn’s name).  
Those who chant your name are the ones who have performed all tap, 
performed all yagnas, bathed in the sacred waters of all the places of 
pilgrimage, and studied all the Veds; they indeed are the ãryãs (the noble 
ones). 
 
“The greatness of Bhagvãn is  described  in  these  two  verses.    Also, 
Kapilji describes his own greatness to Devhuti: 
 
mad-bhayãd-vãti vãto-yam suryas-tapati mad-bhagyãt 
varshateendro dahatyagnir-mrutyush-charati mad-bhayãt 
It is by fear of me that the Vãyu (wind) blows, Surya (sun) shines, Indra 
(clouds) rains, Agni (fire) burns, and Yam (death) devours the living. 
 
5.5
 “A person who has bhakti for Bhagvãn coupled with such knowledge 
of  His  greatness  encounters  no  obstacles  in  any  form.    On  the  other 
hand,  a  person  who  offers bhakti without  realising  the  greatness  of 

GADHADÃ III 
- 692 - 
Bhagvãn and  who  perceives  worldly  characteristics  in  Him,  does 
encounter obstacles.” 
 
5.6 
Muktãnand Swãmi  then  asked, “By  what means can such bhakti 
coupled with the knowledge of Bhagvãn’s greatness be developed?” 
 
5.7 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “Bhakti coupled   with   the   knowledge   of 
Bhagvãn’s greatness  arises  in  a  person’s  heart  by  serving  and 
associating with renowned sãdhus like Shukji and the Sanakãdik.” 
 
5.8 
Then, Shuk Muni asked, “One bhakta has perfect nishchay in Bhagvãn, 
and  disturbances  such  as kãm, krodh, lobh,  and moh do  not  arise  in 
his  heart.    A  second bhakta has  perfect nishchay in Bhagvãn,  but 
disturbances such as kãm, krodh, lobh, and moh do arise in his heart.  
When  these  two  types  of bhaktas leave  their  bodies,  do  they  attain 
the  same  level  of  bliss  in  the dhãm of Bhagvãn,  or  do  they  attain 
different levels of bliss?” 
 
5.9 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If a bhakta of Bhagvãn whose nishchay is 
perfect  and  who  is  not  disturbed  by  inner  enemies,  but  desires 
anything other than the pratyaksha svarup of Shree Krishna Bhagvãn, 
then  even  if  he  is  a  great tyãgi, and  has  firm vairãgya and  intense 
ãtmã-nishthã,  he  will  attain  a  lower  level  of  bliss.    As  for  the  other 
bhakta,  even  though  he  also  has  perfect nishchay in Bhagvãn,  when 
inner  enemies  cause  disturbances  within,  he  feels  guilt  within  his 
heart.      But,   except   for   the pratyaksha svarup of Shree Krishna 
Bhagvãn,  he  wishes  for  no  other  object.    Then,  even  if  he  has  only  a 
slight  amount   of ãtmã-nishthã and vairãgya,   such  a bhakta still 
attains profound bliss in the dhãm of Bhagvãn after leaving his body. 
 
5.10 
“This is because the first bhakta superficially  appears  to  be  a tyãgi 
and nishkãm.    However,  he  does  not  have  wish  for  the murti of 
Bhagvãn, but instead has desires for the darshan of the ãtmã and the 
four  types  of mukti.    Therefore,  he  is  called  a sakãm bhakta.    In  the 
higher loks, he will certainly attain less bliss.  Conversely, the second 

GADHADÃ III 
- 693 - 
bhakta superficially appears to be a sakãm bhakta, but inwardly, that 
bhakta wishes for nothing except the murti of Bhagvãn.  If a desire for 
pleasures  other  than  the murti of Bhagvãn arises,  he  feels  intense 
guilt  in  his  mind.    Therefore,  he  is  called  a nishkãm bhakta.    When 
such  a bhakta leaves  his  body,  he  attains  profound  bliss,  becomes  a 
pãrshad of Bhagvãn and develops intense  love  for the murti of Shree 
Krishna Bhagvãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III || 5 || 239 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 6 
The Friendship Between The Mind And The Jeev 
 
6.1 
In  the Samvat year  1883,  on Bhãdarvã vad 5  [21
st
 September  1826], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  in  His  residence  in 
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was dressed entirely in white 
clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from various places, 
had gathered before Him. 
 
6.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj looked compassionately at all the bhaktas and 
said, “If a bhakta of Bhagvãn engages  in  delivering kathãs,  singing 
kirtans, listening to talks of Bhagvãn, and the rest of the nine types of 
bhakti with jealousy towards other bhaktas, then Bhagvãn is not very 
pleased by that bhakti.  But, if a person discards his jealousy and then 
offers bhakti only  for  his  own kalyãn,  and  not  to  display  to  other 
people,  then Bhagvãn is  pleased  by  that bhakti.    Therefore,  a  person 
who wants to please Bhagvãn should not offer bhakti to please other 
people  or  out  of  jealousy  for  someone,  but  should  do  so  only  for his 
own kalyãn. 
 
6.3 
“While offering bhakti to Bhagvãn, if a person commits a mistake, he 
should not blame someone else for that fault.  It is the very nature of 
all  people  that  when  they  are  at  fault,  they  claim, ‘I made a mistake 
because someone else misled me; but I am not really at fault’.  A person 

GADHADÃ III 
- 694 - 
who says this is a fool.  After all, others may say, ‘Go and jump into a 
well?’  Then, by such words, should a person really jump into a well?  
Of course not.  Therefore, the fault lies only in the person who makes 
the mistake, but he blames others. 
 
6.4 
“Similarly, to blame the indriyas and antah-karans is  the  foolishness 
of the jeev.  In reality, the jeev and the mind are close mutual friends.  
Their friendship is like the friendship between milk and water.  When 
milk  and  water  are  mixed  and  heated  on  a  fire,  water  settles  below 
the milk and it burns, but it does not allow the milk to burn.  To save 
the water, the milk overflows and extinguishes the fire.  Such is their 
friendship.    The jeev and  the  mind  have  a  similarly  close  friendship.  
So, the mind never has thoughts of things that the jeev does not like.  
Only   when   the jeev likes   something   does   the   mind   attempt   to 
persuade  the jeev.    How  does  it  attempt  to  persuade  it?    Well,  when 
the jeev is  performing dhyãn upon Bhagvãn,  the  mind  suggests, ‘You 
should also perform dhyãn on some female bhakta Bhagvãn’.    The 
mind  then makes  the jeev think of all  of her  features.   Then,  it forms 
indecent thoughts about her just as it forms indecent thoughts about 
other women. 
 
6.5 
“But, if the bhakta’s jeev is  extremely  pure,  he  will  not  accept  the 
arguments  of  the  mind,  and  instead,  he  will  feel  intense  sorrow.  
Therefore,   the   mind   will   never   entertain   such   thoughts   again.  
Conversely,   if   his jeev is   polluted   and   sinful,   it   will   accept   the 
arguments of the mind.  Then, by making the bhakta repeatedly think 
of  indecent  thoughts,  the  mind  will  make  him  fall  from  the  path  of 
kalyãn.  For this reason, a true mumukshu develops intense hatred for 
the talks of adharma, which are against the path of kalyãn, regardless 
of  whether  they  are  suggested  by  his  own  mind  or  by  some  other 
person.  Then, his own mind or the other person will not reappear in 
an attempt to persuade him. 
 
6.6 
“Furthermore, because the mind is a friend of the jeev,  it  will  never 
entertain  thoughts  which  the jeev does  not  like.    So,  when  indecent 

GADHADÃ III 
- 695 - 
thoughts  are  formed  in  the  mind,  if  the jeev becomes  extremely 
furious  with  it,  such  thoughts  will  never  arise  in  the  mind  again.  
Therefore, when indecent thoughts repeatedly arise in the mind, the 
bhakta should  understand  it  to  be  the  fault  of  his  own jeev,  not  the 
fault of his mind alone. 
 
6.7 
“If a person offers bhakti to Bhagvãn with this understanding, the evil 
influence  of  some vimukh or  his  own  mind  will  not  be  able  to  affect 
him even slightly.  Then, he will be able to worship Bhagvãn without 
any obstacles.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III || 6 || 240 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 7 
Bhagvãn Is Sãkãr 
 
7.1 
In the Samvat year 1883, on Bhãdarvã vad 6 [22
nd
 September 1826], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress  with  a 
cylindrical  pillow  at  His  residence  in  Dãdã  Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Gadhadã.  He was dressed entirely in white clothes.  He was wearing 
garlands  of mogrã flowers  around  His  neck,  and  tassels  of mogrã 
flowers  also  decorated  His pãgh.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
7.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said to all the bhaktas, “I shall now tell you my 
deepest principle.  For a person who desires his own kalyãn, nothing 
in  this  world is more  blissful  than Bhagvãn and  His sant.   Therefore, 
just  as  a  person  is  deeply  attached  to  his  own  body,  he  should  be 
similarly  attached  to Bhagvãn and  His sant.    A  person  should  also 
remain  absolutely  loyal  to  the bhaktas of Bhagvãn.    Even  if  while 
keeping  that  loyalty  his  reputation  increases  or  decreases,  or  he  is 
honoured  or  insulted,  or  he  lives  or  dies,  in  no  way  should  he 
abandon  his  loyalty  to Bhagvãn and His bhaktas.    In  addition,  he 
should  not  allow  hatred  to  develop  towards  them.    Furthermore,  he 

GADHADÃ III 
- 696 - 
should not have as much love towards his body or bodily relations as 
he has towards the bhaktas of Bhagvãn.  For a bhakta who behaves in 
this  way,  even  extremely  powerful  enemies,  such  as kãm and krodh, 
are unable to defeat him.” 
 
7.3 
Continuing, Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Bhagvãn,  who  possesses  a 
definite murti,  is  always  present  in  His dhãm, Akshardhãm.   Bhaktas 
of Bhagvãn,  who  also  possess  a svarup,  remain  in  His  service  in  that 
dhãm.      Therefore,   a   person   who   has   taken   firm   refuge   in   the 
pratyaksha  svarup of Bhagvãn should  not  have  the  following  fear  in 
his mind:  ‘What if I become a ghost or an evil spirit, or attain the lok of 
Indra  or  the  lok  of  Brahmã  after I die?’  He  should  not  have  such 
doubts in his mind.  After all, a bhakta of Bhagvãn who possesses the 
understanding   mentioned   earlier   definitely   attains   the dhãm of 
Bhagvãn; Bhagvãn does not leave him astray anywhere in between.   
 
7.4 
“Moreover, the bhakta should firmly keep his mind at the holy feet of 
Bhagvãn.  Just as an iron nail that is firmly affixed to an iron surface 
can never be separated, similarly, a person’s mind should be fixed 
firmly  at  the  holy  feet  of Bhagvãn.    When  the bhakta has  kept his 
mind at the holy feet of Bhagvãn in this way, he does not have to die 
to attain the dhãm of Bhagvãn – he attains it while still alive.” 
 
7.5 
Having delivered this talk, Shreeji Mahãrãj bid “Jay Sachidãnand” to 
everyone and then instructed the sabhã to disperse. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III || 7 || 241 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 8 
Do Not Keep The Company Of A Vimukh 
 
8.1 
In  the Samvat year  1883,  on Bhãdarvã vad 9  [25
th
 September  1826], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress  with  a 
cylindrical  pillow  that  had  been  placed  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on 

GADHADÃ III 
- 697 - 
the veranda outside the west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr 
in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    Garlands  of 
mogrã flowers  were  hanging  around  His  neck,  and  tassels  of mogrã 
flowers decorated His pãgh.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
8.2 
Then,   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   asked   the munis,  “How   can   a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn remain  eternally  happy?”    The  senior sãdhus replied 
according  to  their  understanding,  but  then  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  Himself 
said, “The answer is that a bhakta of Bhagvãn who has firm vairãgya 
and  has  extremely  firm svadharma;  who  has gained  control  over  all 
of  his indriyas by  these  two  means;  who  has  intense  love  for  the 
Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas;  who  has  a  close  friendship  with Bhagvãn 
and  His bhaktas;  who  never  becomes  indifferent  towards Bhagvãn 
and His bhaktas; and who is pleased only by the company of Bhagvãn 
and His bhaktas, but does not like the company of a vimukh – remains 
eternally happy in this lok and beyond. 
 
8.3 
“A  person,  who  has  not  controlled  his indriyas by vairãgya and 
svadharma remains  miserable,  despite  staying  in  the  company  of 
Bhagvãn and  His bhakta.    This  is  because  a  person  who  has  not 
gained   control   over   his indriyas does   not   experience   happiness 
anywhere.  Even while engaged in bhakti towards Bhagvãn, when the 
indriyas are  drawn  towards  the vishays,  that bhakta experiences 
extreme  misery  in  his  heart.    Therefore,  only  a  person  who  gains 
control over his indriyas remains eternally happy.  Furthermore, only 
a  person  who  has  gained  control  over  his indriyas should  be  known 
to have vairãgya and dharma.    A  person  who  has  not  controlled  his 
indriyas should   not   be  known   to   possess vairãgya and dharma.  
Therefore, since a person who has vairãgya and dharma has restraint 
over all of his indriyas, he is eternally happy.” 
 
8.4 
Then,  Muktãnand Swãmi said, “Mahãrãj, for a bhakta of Bhagvãn, 
what is the one greatest obstacle in his bhakti towards Bhagvãn?” 

GADHADÃ III 
- 698 - 
8.5 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “For  a bhakta of Bhagvãn,   the   greatest 
obstacles  are  that  he  does  not  realise  his  own  faults,  his  mind 
becomes  distant  from Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas,  and  he  develops  a 
lack  of  concern  towards  the bhakta of Bhagvãn.    These  are  the 
greatest obstacles for a bhakta.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III || 8 || 242 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 9 
Awareness 
 
9.1 
In  the Samvat year  1883,  on Ãso sud 11  [11
th
 October  1826],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  the  veranda  outside  the 
west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was 
dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes,  and  was  wearing  garlands  around 
His  neck,  and gajarã of  flowers  were  tied  around  His  arms.    Also, 
tassels  of  flowers  were hanging  from  His pãgh.    A sabhã of munis,  as 
well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
9.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said to all the bhaktas, “I shall now describe to 
all of you male and female bhaktas the sthiti and understanding of my 
senior paramhans as  it  truly  is.    After  listening  to  this  talk,  I  request 
all of you to narrate how you behave and to reveal your sthiti.” 
 
9.3 
Saying  this,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj began, “The senior sãdhus in  my muni-
mandal behave in such a way that the awareness within their hearts 
is the gateway to the dhãm of Bhagvãn.  It is at this gateway where all 
the sãdhus remain standing.  Consider the following analogy:  A king’s 
guards, while standing at the entrance of the king’s palace, do not 
allow   any   thieves   or   robbers   to   come   near   the   king.      They 
courageously   believe, ‘If  anyone  comes  near  the  king  to  cause 
problems,  we  will  cut  them  to  pieces,  but  in  no  way  will  we  let  them 
reach the king’.  With such courage, they wait, armed with shields and 
swords.  Similarly, all these sãdhus are standing at the gateway of the 
dhãm of Bhagvãn in the form of awareness. 

GADHADÃ III 
- 699 - 
9.4
 “Inside that gateway of awareness (Akshardhãm)  dwells Bhagvãn,  of 
whom  they  do darshan.    They  do  not  allow  wealth,  women,  or  any 
other worldly objects to enter that murti of Bhagvãn in their heart.  If 
any  worldly  object  does  forcefully  attempt  to  enter  the  heart,  they 
destroy  that  object,  but  in  no  way  do  they  allow  it  to  enter  the 
location in their heart where they have secured Bhagvãn.  In this way, 
they constantly remain alert like a brave warrior.  However, they do 
not  move  from  their  position,  regardless  of  whether  they  encounter 
progress   or   regress,   happiness   or   misery,   praises   or   insults,   or 
countless other types of difficulties. 
 
9.5 
“However,  someone  may  doubt, ‘If  they  do  not  move  from  their 
position,  then  how  do  they  perform  their  bodily  activities,  such  as 
eating and drinking?’  I shall explain this using the following example:  
Consider a woman who goes to a well to draw water.  She places her 
feet on the edge of the well.  On the one hand, she remains cautious of 
this, for fear that she will fall into the well.  However, her vrutti is also 
fixed upon drawing water from the well.  In another example, a man 
who has mounted a horse is aware of his feet in the horse’s stirrups 
and  is  also  aware  of  the  reins  in  his  hands.    While  riding,  he  is  also 
aware  of  the  trees,  ditches,  and  stones  that  come  along  the  path.    In 
the  same  way,  all  these sãdhus,  while  keeping antar-drashti,  remain 
in  the sevã of Bhagvãn and  also  perform  their bodily  activities;  but 
they are not deflected from their sthiti.” 
 
9.6 
Shreeji Mahãrãj therefore revealed the sthiti of the senior sãdhus and 
then  said,  “All  of  you  should  keep antar-drashti and   constantly 
remain  in  the sevã of Bhagvãn.    Moreover,  you  should  not  allow 
objects  other  than Bhagvãn to  become  dearer  to  you  than  Him.    All 
should be extremely cautious of this. 
 
9.7 
“After all, if a king’s guard is careless while guarding the king, thieves 
and  robbers  would  reach  the  king,  and the guard’s service would be 
rendered  meaningless.    Similarly,  if  a bhakta develops  love  for  the 
objects  other  than Bhagvãn,  then  money,  women,  and  other  objects 

GADHADÃ III 
- 700 - 
also enter his heart, in which lies the awareness of Bhagvãn.  Due to 
this, his bhakti is rendered meaningless. 
 
9.8 
“Therefore,  a  person  who  wishes  to  keep  his bhakti free   from 
obstacles  and  to  attain  the  holy  feet  of Bhagvãn,  should  remain 
constantly vigilant at the gateway of the dhãm of Bhagvãn in the form 
of  awareness,  and  should  not  allow  any objects  except Bhagvãn to 
enter his heart.” 
 
9.9 
In  this  way,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  spoke  words  of  wisdom  for  all  of  His 
bhaktas. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III || 9 || 243 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 10 
Vrundãvan And Kãshi 
 
10.1 
In  the Samvat year  1883,  on Ãso vad 12  [28
th
 October  1826],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  the  veranda  outside  the 
east-facing  rooms  of  Dãdã  Khãchar's darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was 
dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of sãdhus,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
10.2 
In the sabhã, an educated brãhman of the Mãdhvi Sampradãy came to 
Shreeji Mahãrãj.  Shreeji Mahãrãj asked him, “In the shãstras of your 
sampradãy, Vrundãvan is called the dhãm of Bhagvãn.  It is also said, 
‘Even at the time of final destruction, Vrundãvan is not destroyed’.  The 
followers  of Shiv also  claim, ‘At the time of final destruction, Kãshi is 
not destroyed’.    But,  I  do  not  understand  these  statements.    This  is 
because during final destruction, pruthvi, jal, tej, vãyu, and ãkãsh are 
completely  destroyed,  so  how  can  Vrundãvan  and  Kãshi  possibly 
remain?    If  they  do  remain,  how  are  they  supported?    Such  serious 
doubts arise.” 
10.3 
Having  said  this,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  for  the  Shreemad  Bhãgvat 
shãstras to   be   brought,   and   the   narration   of   the   four   types   of 

GADHADÃ III 
- 701 - 
destruction  (nitya-pralay, nimit-pralay, prãkrut-pralay,  and ãtyantik-
pralay) from the eleventh and twelfth skandhs. 
 
10.4 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “Looking  from  the  viewpoint  of  the 
Shreemad  Bhãgvat  and  the  Geetã,  during  final  destruction,  nothing 
remains of anything that has evolved from Prakruti and Purush.  So, if 
in final destruction Vrundãvan does remain intact, then please quote 
a verse from the shãstras of Vyãsji or a verse from the Veds to prove 
it.  There is no greater ãchãrya than Vyãsji.  Others, who have become 
ãchãryas and  have  established  their sampradãys,  have  accepted  the 
shãstras of Vyãsji as  respected.    Therefore,  the  words  of Vyãsji,  the 
greatest ãchãrya, are more respected than the words of all the other 
ãchãryas.    So,  using  the  words  of Vyãsji and  the  verse  of  the  Veds, 
verify   the   statement, ‘Vrundãvan  is  not  destroyed  in  the  final 
destruction’.  Only then will my doubt be cleared. 
 
10.5 
“Moreover,  whoever has  become  an ãchãrya has  established  his 
beliefs  based  on  reference  from  the  words  of  the  Pãdma  Purãn.  
Mostly,  they  have  established  these  beliefs  by  inserting  fictional 
verses  into  the  Pãdma  Purãn.   As  a  result,  no  one  besides  their  own 
followers  believes  them.    Therefore,  I  will  be  convinced  if  you  quote 
the  words  of  the  popular  Shreemad  Bhãgvat  Purãn.    This  is  because 
Vyãsji had composed  the Shreemad  Bhãgvat  after  taking  the  essence 
of all the Veds, Purãns, and the historical shãstras.  Therefore, there is 
no  Purãn  as  perfectly  respected  as  the  Shreemad  Bhãgvat.    Also,  the 
whole  of  the  Mahãbhãrat  is  not  as  respected  as  the  Bhagvad  Geetã.  
Therefore,  quote  the  words  of  such  powerful shãstras to  convince 
me.” 
 
10.6 
After  hearing  these  words  of  Shreeji  Mahãrãj,  the brãhman said, 
“Mahãrãj, the question you have raised is logical.  There is no one on 
this  earth  capable  of  answering  your  question.    In  my  mind,  I  have 
formed  a  firm  belief, ‘You are the ãchãrya  of  all  ãchãryas,  and  the 
ishvar of all ishvars’.    Therefore,  please  have  compassion  on  me  and 
explain to me your principle.” 

GADHADÃ III 
- 702 - 
10.7 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “From the Veds, the Purãns, the historical 
shãstras,  and  the  Smrutis,  I  have  formed  the  belief  that jeev, mãyã, 
ishvar, Brahm,  and Parbrahm are  all  eternal.    Consider  it  as  follows:  
Mãyã represents the soil, the jeevs represent the seeds in the soil, and 
ishvar, represents the rain.  By the will of Bhagvãn, an ishvar – in the 
form  of Purush – unites  with Mãyã.    As  a  result,  just  as  the  seeds  in 
the  soil  sprout  by  the  association  of  rainwater,  similarly,  the jeevs, 
which  are  eternal,  arise  from  within Mãyã;  but  new jeevs are  not 
created.    Therefore,  just  as ishvar is  eternal, Mãyã is  eternal.    The 
jeevs residing   within Mãyã are   also   eternal,   and   they   are   not 
components of Bhagvãn; they are always jeevs. 
 
10.8 
“When a jeev seeks  the  refuge  of Bhagvãn,  it  overcomes Bhagvãn’s 
Mãyã,  becomes brahm-rup like Nãrad and  the Sanakãdik,  attains  the 
dhãm of Bhagvãn, and becomes His pãrshad.  This is my principle.” 
 
10.9 
Hearing these words of Shreeji Mahãrãj, the brãhman abandoned his 
Vaishnav beliefs, accepted Shreeji Mahãrãj’s refuge, and was initiated 
into the Uddhav Sampradãy.    
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III || 10 || 244 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 11 
Understanding Like That Of Sitãji 
 
11.1 
In  the Samvat year  1883,  on Ashãdh sud 3  [27
th
 June  1827],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on 
the  veranda  outside  the  east-facing  rooms of  Dãdã  Khãchar's darbãr 
in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of 
munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before Him. 
 
11.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “I wish to ask the following question:  Is 
there one method to overcome both the indriyas and the mind?  Or is 

GADHADÃ III 
- 703 - 
the  method  to  overcome  the indriyas different  from  the  means  to 
overcome the mind?  That is the question.” 
 
11.3 
The senior paramhans replied  according  to  their  understanding,  but 
they were unable to give a precise answer. 
 
11.4 
So, Shreeji Mahãrãj said Himself, “The answer is that the indriyas are 
overcome  by vairãgya, svadharma, tap,  and niyams;  and  the  mind  is 
overcome by the nine types of bhakti coupled with the knowledge of 
Bhagvãn’s greatness.” 
 
11.5 
Muktãnand Swãmi then asked, “How can the type of bliss that a 
bhakta of Bhagvãn enjoys  in nirvikalp samãdhi be  enjoyed  even 
without samãdhi?” 
 
11.6 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied, “If the bhakta has  profound  attachment  and 
deep  love  for Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas,  just  like  the  attachment  and 
love that he has for his own body, then the type of bliss that prevails 
in nirvikalp samãdhi will  continue  to  remain  forever,  even  without 
that samãdhi.  That is the only answer.” 
 
11.7 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked paramhans,  “What  type  of 
understanding  must  a bhakta have,  where  he  will  in  no  way  recede 
from  the  path  of kalyãn regardless  of  the  unpleasant  circumstances 
he may encounter, and where he develops such firmness that he will 
not be affected by any obstacles whatsoever?” 
 
11.8 
The senior sãdhus attempted to answer according to their 
understanding, but Shreeji Mahãrãj’s question was not completely 
answered. 
 
11.9 
So, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “The answer to this is as follows:  If a person 
is  profoundly  attached  to Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas,  just  as  he  is 
attached to his body, then he will not be affected by any obstacles.  In 

GADHADÃ III 
- 704 - 
fact,  regardless  of  the  extent  of  unpleasant  circumstances  he  may 
encounter, he will not turn away from Bhagvãn and His bhaktas.” 
 
11.10 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  addressed  the paramhans again.    He  said, 
“When Sitãji was  exiled  to  the  forest  by Rãmchandraji,  she  felt  great 
sorrow.      Lakshmanji   was   also   very   unhappy.      But   then Sitãji 
explained  to  Lakshmanji, ‘I am not crying because of my own grief; I 
am    crying    for    the    grief    of    Rãmchandraji.        He    is    extremely 
compassionate,  and  since  he  has  exiled  me  to  the  forest  out  of  fear  of 
public accusation, he must be thinking, “I have sent  Sitã  to  the  forest 
without any fault of her own.”  Knowing this and being compassionate, 
he  must  be  experiencing  severe  grief  in  his  mind.    So,  please  tell 
Rãmchandraji, “Sitã is not distressed; she will go to Vãlmiki Rushi’s 
ãshram and happily engage in your worship there.  So, do not feel any 
sorrow on account of Sitã’s distress.”  Please pass this message to 
Rãmchandraji.  Sitãji sent  this  message  with  Lakshmanji,  but  in  no 
way did she perceive faults in Rãmchandraji. 
 
11.11 
“Now, one bhakta is such that he does not perceive faults in Bhagvãn 
and  His bhaktas,  but his vairãgya and dharma are moderate.    On  the 
other  hand,  another bhakta has  intense vairãgya and dharma,  but 
does not have an understanding like that of Sitã.  Of these two types 
of bhaktas,  which  type  should  a  person  lovingly  keep  the  company 
of?” 
 
11.12 
Chaitanyãnand  Swãmi  replied,  “A  person  should  only  keep  the 
company – with intense love – of someone who has an understanding 
like Sitãji, even though that person’s dharma and vairãgya may  be 
moderate.      He   should   not   keep   the   company   of   someone,   who 
perceives faults in Bhagvãn and His bhaktas, even though that person 
may have intense vairãgya and dharma.” 
 
11.13 
Hearing this, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “The answer is correct.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III || 11 || 245 || 

GADHADÃ III 
- 705 - 
Gadhadã III – 12 
Perceiving Avgun In Bhagvãn And His Sant 
 
12.1 
In  the Samvat year  1884,  on Ashãdh vad 8  [16
th
 July  1827],  Swãmi 
Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in the balcony of the medi of 
His residence in Dãdã Khãchar's darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was dressed 
entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
12.2 
Then,  for  the  benefit  of  His bhaktas, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “A person 
who  desires his  own kalyãn should  not  have  any form  of  pride, such 
as, ‘I have been born in an upper-class family’,  or ‘I am wealthy’,  or ‘I 
am handsome’,  or ‘I am a scholar’.    He  should  not  keep  any  of  these 
beliefs.    In  fact,  even  with  a  humble satsangi,  he  should  behave  as  a 
dãs of a dãs. 
 
12.3 
“Furthermore, even though he may be called a satsangi, a person who 
has  perceived avgun in Bhagvãn or  His bhaktas should  be  known  to 
be like a rabid dog.  Just as a person who is touched by the saliva of a 
rabid dog also become rabid, similarly, if a person listens to the talks 
of   or   keeps   affection   for   someone   who   has   perceived avgun in 
Bhagvãn or   His bhaktas,   then   both   the   person   who   keeps   the 
affection   and   the   listener   become   like   a vimukh.     Then,   just  as 
tuberculosis  is  never  cured  by  any  medicine,  similarly,  the  demonic 
attitude  of  a  person  who  has  perceived avgun in Bhagvãn or  His 
bhaktas is  never  eradicated  from  his  heart.    On  the  other  hand,  a 
person who may have killed countless brãhmans; or may have killed 
countless children; or may have killed countless women; or may have 
killed countless cows; or may have even associated many times with 
the  wife  of  his guru,  can  be  freed  from  these  sins  at  some  time  or 
other.    In  fact,  the shãstras even  describe  the methods  to  do  so.  
However, no shãstra describes methods to be released from the sin of 
perceiving avgun in Bhagvãn or  His bhaktas.  If  a  person  consumes 
poison, or falls into the ocean, or falls from a mountain, or is eaten by 

GADHADÃ III 
- 706 - 
a  demon,  then  he  has  to  die only  once.    However,  a  person  who 
insults Bhagvãn or His bhaktas has to continuously die and be reborn 
for countless millions of years. 
 
12.4 
“At most, a disease leads to the death of the body; or an enemy 
destroys  the  body;  but,  the jeev is  not  destroyed.    However,  by 
insulting Bhagvãn or His bhaktas, the jeev is also destroyed.  Someone 
may  ask, ‘How can the jeev be destroyed?’  Well,  for  example,  a 
hermaphrodite  cannot  be  called  a  man  or  a  woman,  he  can  only  be 
called  impotent.   Similarly,  the jeev of  a  person  who  insults Bhagvãn 
or His bhaktas also becomes impotent; the jeev is never able to make 
an effort for his own kalyãn.  Therefore, his jeev should be known as 
having  been  destroyed.    Knowing  this,  a  person  should  never  insult 
Bhagvãn or His bhaktas. 
 
12.5 
“In addition, a person should not have deep affection for his bodily 
relations,  even  if  they  happen  to  be satsangis.    For  example,  if  a 
snake’s venom falls into some sweetened milk, then whoever drinks 
it will die.  In the same way, even if a person’s bodily relations are 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn,  they are  still mixed  with  venom  (relationships).  
Therefore,   a   person   who   has   affection   for   them   will   definitely 
sacrifice  his kalyãn.    Knowing  this,  a  person  who wishes for his  own 
kalyãn should  not  maintain  affection  for  his  bodily  relations.    In  this 
way,  after  becoming  detached  from  worldly  life  and  having  love  for 
the  holy  feet  of Bhagvãn,  a  person  should  continue  to  engage  in  the 
worship of Bhagvãn. 
 
12.6 
“A person who retains the talk that I have just delivered within his 
heart,  will  never  encounter  obstacles  on  the  path  of kalyãn.    In  fact, 
this talk is like a miraculous technique.” 
 
12.7 
Shreeji Mahãrãj concluded the talk with these words. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III || 12 || 246 || 

GADHADÃ III 
- 707 - 
Gadhadã III – 13 
The Wish Of Bhagvãn Is Our Prãrabdha 
 
13.1 
In  the Samvat year  1884,  on Ashãdh vad 9  [17
th
 July  1827],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  the  veranda  outside  the 
east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was 
dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    Garlands  of mogrã flowers  were 
hanging around His neck, and tassels decorated His pãgh.  A sabhã of 
munis, as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before   Him.    Some of   the munis were   singing kirtans to   the 
accompaniment of a dukad and sarodã.  
 
13.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Please stop singing the kirtans, and let us 
talk  about Bhagvãn.”  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  a  question  to  the muni-
mandal:  “A jeev’s body  is  dependent  upon  the karmas performed  in 
past  lives.    That  is  why  it  is  not  always  so  stable.    For  example, 
sometimes a person remains healthy, and sometimes he becomes ill; 
sometimes  he functions  independently,  and  sometimes  he  becomes 
dependent,  where  he  may  or  may  not  be  able  to  stay  where  he 
chooses;  and  sometimes  he  may  be  able  to  stay  in  the  company  of 
bhaktas, but sometimes he may even be separated from them and be 
forced to live alone.  All of this is due to the influence of karma or kãl.  
In such circumstance, a person’s determination in observing niyams 
becomes unsteady. 
 
13.3 
“Further, if a ruler like the British detains a person; or if a person’s 
mind and indriyas – which are also like the British rulers – keep him 
under  their  control,  then  it  is  uncertain  whether  he  will  stay  in  the 
company of sãdhus or follow the niyams of satsang.  Having said this, 
the shãstras have specifically stated: ‘If a person perfectly possesses all 
four of the qualities of dharma, gnãn, vairãgya, and bhakti, then he can 
be   called   an   ekãntik  bhakta,   and   such   a   person   attains   ultimate 
kalyãn’.    Also,  it  seems  unlikely  that  the  physical  conditions  will 
remain stable under the influence of Kãl and karma.  Therefore, how 

GADHADÃ III 
- 708 - 
can  a bhakta of Bhagvãn maintain  his ekãntik state?    That  is  the 
question.” 
 
13.4 
Then,  Gopãlãnand  Swãmi,  Chaitanyãnand  Swãmi,  Nityãnand  Swãmi, 
Muktãnand Swãmi, Brahmãnand Swãmi, Shuk Muni, and other senior 
sãdhus answered  according  to  whatever  they  felt  was  correct  but 
were unable to answer the question satisfactorily.   
 
13.5 
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said in reply, “Please listen as I reveal to you 
the  way  in  which  my  belief  of Bhagvãn remains firms.”  He then 
began, “Regardless of how much pain or pleasure comes my way, and 
regardless  of  whether  wealth  or  poverty  comes  my  way,  in  those 
circumstances,  first  I  realise  the  immense  greatness  of Bhagvãn.    On 
seeing the riches and royal wealth of the great kings of this world, it 
is   this   understanding   that   allows   me   to   not   associate   even   the 
slightest  amount  of  significance  to  them  in  my  heart.    I  believe  that 
for  me,  there  is  nothing  greater  than Bhagvãn;  and  so  my  mind  is 
firmly  attached  to  His  holy  feet.    In  fact,  my  love  for Bhagvãn is  so 
firm that even Kãl, karma, and Mãyã are incapable of destroying that 
love.  Even if my own mind attempts to destroy that love for Bhagvãn, 
it cannot be destroyed.  In fact, my love is such that regardless of the 
extent of happiness or misery that may happen to come my way, the 
love is not destroyed. 
 
13.6 
“Also, the natural inclination of my mind is such that I do not at all 
prefer  to  live  in  cities,  in  mansions  or  in  royal  palaces.    On  the 
contrary,   I   very   much   prefer   to   stay   where   there   are   forests, 
mountains,  rivers,  trees,  or  in  some  secluded  place.    I feel  that  it 
would be nice to sit alone in some secluded place and perform dhyãn 
upon Bhagvãn.  That is what I prefer at all times.  In fact, before I had 
the   darshan   of   Rãmãnand   Swãmi,   I   had   already   decided   with 
Muktãnand  Swãmi, ‘After you arrange for me to  have  the  darshan  of 
Rãmãnand Swãmi, the two of us will retire to the forest and constantly 
engage ourselves in the dhyãn of Bhagvãn, and never shall we return to 

GADHADÃ III 
- 709 - 
stay amongst people’.    Such  was  the  determination  in  my  mind  then; 
even now, I feel exactly the same. 
 
13.7 
“In addition, the profound love that I have for Bhagvãn and  His 
bhaktas is so strong that even Kãl, karma, and Mãyã are incapable of 
eradicating  that  love.    In  fact,  even  if  my  own  mind  attempted  to 
eradicate  it,  it  would  definitely  not  be  eradicated  from  my  heart.  
Such is the intense love I have for Bhagvãn and His bhaktas. 
 
13.8 
“Many times I have become disheartened  and  felt  like  leaving  this 
satsang, but I have remained here on seeing the bhaktas; I could in no 
way  abandon  them  and  leave.    In  fact,  I  would  be  unable  to  stay 
where  I  do  not  find  such bhaktas of Bhagvãn,  even  if  someone  were 
to try by a million methods to keep me there.  Regardless of how well 
a person may serve me, I simply cannot get along with someone who 
is not a bhakta of Bhagvãn.  In this way, I have attached my mind with 
profound  love  to Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas;  and  other  than  that 
Bhagvãn,  I  have  no  liking  for  anything else.   If  that  is so,  why should 
love  for Bhagvãn not  remain?    When  I  am  engaged  in kathãs or 
kirtans related to Bhagvãn, I experience such happiness that I feel as 
if I shall become mad due to it.  In fact, whatever calmness remains is 
solely  for  the  benefit  of  the bhaktas;  but  in  the  mind,  the  very  same 
happiness    always    remains;    although    outwardly,    I    behave    in 
accordance with the customs of society. 
 
13.9 
“It is that very Bhagvãn who is the sole controller of this body.  If He 
wishes,  He  may  seat  him  on  an  elephant;  or  if  He  wishes,  He  may 
have it thrown in prison; or if He so wishes, He may even place some 
serious illness in the body.  Despite this, a person should never pray 
before Bhagvãn in the following way:  ‘Mahãrãj!  Please relieve me of 
my  misery’.      This   is   because   we   want   this   body   to   behave   in 
accordance  with  the  wishes  of Bhagvãn;  after  all, Bhagvãn’s wish  is 
our  wish.    We  do  not  want  our  preferences  to  differ  from  the 
preferences  of Bhagvãn even  in  the  slightest  way.   Moreover,  since 
we  have  offered  our  body,  mind,  and  wealth  to Bhagvãn,  then  only 

GADHADÃ III 
- 710 - 
the wish of Bhagvãn is our prãrabdha; besides that, there is no other 
prãrabdha for us.  Therefore, regardless of whatever pain or pleasure 
we  may  encounter  by  the  wish  of Bhagvãn,  we  should  not  become 
disturbed  in  any  way;  we  should  be  pleased  with  whatever  pleases 
Bhagvãn. 
 
13.10 
“Therefore, Bhagvãn Himself  protects  the dharma, gnãn, vairãgya, 
and bhakti of  a bhakta who  has  such  intense  love  for Bhagvãn.  
Occasionally,  due  to  the  prevalence  of  unpleasant  circumstances,  it 
may  outwardly  appear  that  such  a bhakta is  disobeying dharma, 
gnãn, vairãgya, and bhakti, but inwardly, there is no disobedience at 
all.” 
 
13.11 
In  this  way,  by  quoting  His  own  example, Shreeji  Mahãrãj  described 
the understanding of an extremely firm bhakta of Bhagvãn, and how 
he should develop firm love for Bhagvãn. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III || 13 || 247 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 14 
Love And Faith 
The Kãyasth’s Unworthy Desire 
 
14.1 
In  the Samvat year  1884,  on Ashãdh vad 11  [19
th
 July  1827],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  the  veranda  outside  the 
east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was 
dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    Tassels  of  flowers  were  hanging 
from  the pãgh upon  His head,  and  garlands  of  flowers  were hanging 
around His neck.  A sabhã of paramhans, as well as haribhaktas from 
various  places,  had  gathered  before  Him.  Some munis were  singing 
kirtans. 
 
14.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Please stop  the  singing  and  begin  a 
question-answer discussion.” 
 

GADHADÃ III 
- 711 - 
14.3 
Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked with folded hands “Mahãrãj, there is 
nothing more essential than Bhagvãn; yet why does an individual not 
develop deep love for Him?  That is the question.”  
 
14.4 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “He has no wisdom.    If  he  did  have wisdom, 
he  would  think, ‘I have accepted the vow of brahm-chãrya,  yet  the 
desire  to  enjoy  the  pleasures  of  women  still  has  not  disappeared  from 
my  heart.    That  is  very  improper  as  I  have  invariably  enjoyed  the 
pleasures of women when I have taken birth in the 8.4 million life forms 
– and  those  pleasures  have  always  been  much  greater  than  those 
experienced in a human birth’.    When  this jeev was  born  as  a  goat,  it 
must  have  single-handedly  indulged  in  the  pleasures  of  a  thousand 
female goats.  When it took birth as a horse, or a bull, or a buffalo, or 
a king monkey, or indeed any other animal, it must have encountered 
countless  young,  beautiful  females  of  its  own  species.    This  was  not 
due  to prãrabdha,  nor  was  it  due  to Bhagvãn’s grace – it  was  only 
natural.    Moreover,  if  a  person  does  not  worship Bhagvãn,  he  will 
obtain  countless  females  in  whichever  life-form  he  is  born  in.    This 
would not be due to the sevã or pujã of some dev, or to the chanting of 
some mantra;  as  the  opportunity  of  enjoying  women  and  other 
pleasures is natural.   
 
14.5
 This jeev has  become  a dev several  times,  where  it  has  enjoyed  the 
pleasures  of  Dev-Lok;  many  times  it  has  become  an  emperor  of  the 
world  and  enjoyed  countless  pleasures  on  this  earth.    Despites  this, 
the jeev’s craving  to  enjoy  women  and  other  objects  has  still  not 
diminished.  Instead, a person feels that the pleasures of women and 
other   objects   are   extremely   rare   and,   realising   their   immense 
pleasure,  develops  affection  for  them.    That  affection  is  such  that  it 
can  in  no  way  be  eradicated,  however  much  a  person  tries.    It  is 
because  of  this  sin  that  the jeev is  unable  to  develop  deep  love  for 
Bhagvãn. 
 
14.5 
“I have personally seen with my own eyes how the jeev has  such 
impure, worldly desires.  When I was young, I used to go to a mandir 

GADHADÃ III 
- 712 - 
of Shiv in Ayodhyã and sleep there.  One day, a Kãyasth came to offer 
pujã to Shiv and  ask  for  the  following vardãn:   ‘O Mahãrãj!  O Shivji!  
Never grant me a human birth again.  In this human birth, I have taken 
so   many   aphrodisiacs,   yet   I   have   been   unable   to   fully   enjoy   the 
pleasures  of  women  to  my  satisfaction.    Therefore,  O  Shivji!    Please 
grant me the body of a donkey for many lives to come so that I can fully 
enjoy the pleasures of females without shame or restrictions’.  He asked 
for this vardãn from Shivji daily.  So, because of this sin of harbouring 
worldly  desires,  the jeev does  not  develop  love  for Bhagvãn in  any 
way.” 
 
14.6 
Muktãnand Swãmi then asked further, “Mahãrãj, a person who does 
not have wisdom does not develop love for Bhagvãn.  But, what about 
someone who believes that Bhagvãn is the ocean of all bliss, and that 
all  objects  other  than Bhagvãn are  certainly  full  of  only  misery?  
Despite knowing this, why does he not develop love for Bhagvãn?” 
 
14.7 
Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “In either a past life or in this present life, 
that  person  has  been  influenced  by  extremely  unpleasant desh, kãl, 
kriyã,  and sang.    Due  to  this,  he  has  performed  very  intense,  sinful 
karmas that  have  left  impressions  on  his  mind.    Therefore,  despite 
being  able  to  discriminate  between  good  and  bad,  he  is  unable  to 
avoid the bad and develop deep love for Bhagvãn.  Moreover, just as 
the  influence  of  unpleasant desh, kãl, kriyã,  and sang causes  the 
impressions  of  sinful karmas to  influence  the  mind,  similarly,  the 
influence  of  extremely  pleasant desh, kãl, kriyã,  and sang causes  a 
person to perform very intense, pure karmas.  The influence of these 
pure karmas will  destroy  the  very  intense,  sinful karmas.    Only  then 
does a person develop deep love for Bhagvãn.  That is the answer to 
the question.” 
 
14.8 
Then, Ayodhyãprasãdji asked, “Suppose there is a person who is very 
intelligent,  and  whose  knowledge  of  the shãstras is  also  exceptional.  
On the other hand, there is a person who is not so intelligent and who 
has a limited understanding of the shãstras.  Nevertheless, the person 

GADHADÃ III 
- 713 - 
who  is  very  intelligent  falls  from satsang,  whereas  a  person  who  is 
not intelligent remains firm in satsang.  What is the reason for this?” 
 
14.9 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj answered, “There are two types of people in this 
world:  religious and demonic.  Of these, those who are demonic will 
fall  from satsang,  despite  being  exceptionally  intelligent;  whereas 
those who are religious will never fall from satsang, even though they 
may not be intelligent.  For example, if a person sows a seed of chilli 
or the seed of a neem tree or the seed of a shingadiyo vachhnãg plant 
and he waters them daily with sweet water, the chillies will still turn 
out  to  be  spicy;  the  neem  tree  will  still  be  bitter;  and  the shingadiyo 
vachhnãg plant  will  still  be  poisonous.    This  is  because  that  is  the 
nature of the seeds themselves.  On the other hand, if a person sows 
sugarcane,  the  juice  of  the  sugarcane  will  still  be  sweet  despite 
treating  it  with  compost  from  leaves  of  a  neem  tree  and  watering  it 
with bitter water.  In the same way, religious people will always stay 
on  the  path  of Bhagvãn,  and  demonic  people  will  always  turn  away 
from the path of Bhagvãn.” 
 
14.10 
Then, Shuk Muni asked, “How can a person  distinguish  between  a 
religious person and a demonic person?” 
 
14.11 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “In a religious person,  vicious  natures  such 
as kãm, krodh,  and lobh,  are  due  to  the  influence  of  unpleasant 
circumstances.    However,  they  are  destroyed  within  a  short  time 
under the influence of pleasant circumstances.  On the other hand, in 
a  demonic  person,  vicious  natures  such  as kãm, krodh,  and lobh,  are 
never  destroyed.    If  someone  were  to  speak  some  harsh  words  to  a 
demonic  person  even  once,  he  would  not  forget  them  for  as  long  as 
he lives.  Then, if that demonic person were to become a satsangi, he 
would initially appear to be better than all the other bhaktas.  But, he 
would  be  like  silt  that  has  gathered  in  the  region  of  Bhãl – where 
there  was  previously  sea – has  made  the  soil  fertile.    As  long  as  the 
silt  remains, sweet  water  can  be obtained  by  digging  below;  but,  if  a 
person were to dig much deeper, then extremely saline water would 

GADHADÃ III 
- 714 - 
emerge.    In  the  same  way,  even  if  a  demonic  person  has  become  a 
bhakta of Bhagvãn, the moment his wishes are not fulfilled and he is 
even  slightly  disturbed,  then  compared  to  the sevã of  the sãdhus he 
had  previously  performed,  he  would  insult  them  thousands  of  times 
more.  Even then, his mind would not be happy.” 
 
14.12 
Muktãnand Swãmi then asked, “Mahãrãj, you said that a demonic 
person  who  becomes  a bhakta will  remain  in satsang as  long  as  his 
wishes are fulfilled; and if they are not fulfilled, he falls from satsang.  
But,  what  if  he  happens  to  die  before  falling  from satsang?    Will  he 
remain demonic, or will he become religious?” 
 
14.13 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “As long as the demonic person is good when 
he encounters death, and he offers bhakti to Bhagvãn, he will become 
religious and will attain Akshardhãm.” 
 
14.14 
Then, Nrusinhãnand Swãmi asked, “Of the nine types of bhakti, which 
is the best?” 
 
14.15 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Of the nine types of bhakti, whichever type 
helps a person in developing firm attachment to Bhagvãn is the best 
type of bhakti for that particular person.” 
 
14.16 
Then, Gopãlãnand Swãmi asked, “During childhood or during youth, 
what type of company should a person seek?” 
 
14.17 
Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “Both should lovingly keep the company 
of  a  person  who  is  senior  in  age,  is  firm  in dharma, gnãn,  and 
vairãgya; and has deep love for Bhagvãn.” 
 
14.18 
Then Nãjã Jogiyã asked, “Which is the best of the three:  a person 
whose  mind  is  attached  to Bhagvãn out  of  anger,  a  person  whose 
mind  is  attached  to Bhagvãn out  of  fear,  or  a  person  whose  mind  