y  approaches  a 
guru,   several   factors   cause   distinctions   in   his nishchay:      the 
pleasantness  and  unpleasantness  of desh, kãl, sang, dikshã, kriyã, 
mantra,   and shãstras,   with   regards   to   the guru;   as   well   as   the 
intensity  of  his  own shraddhã.    Therefore,  a  person  should  always 
associate with pleasant desh, kãl, kriyã, and sang.  Moreover, a person 
should acquire wisdom from a speaker who is calm and faultless.” 
 
12.11
 Chaitanyãnand Swãmi asked further, “If under such circumstances a 
person  develops  the kanishth nishchay,  can  it  later  develop  into  the 
uttam nishchay?” 
 

LOYÃ 
- 358 - 
12.12
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If the listener possesses extreme shraddhã; 
and  if  he  encounters  pleasant desh, kãl, kriyã,  and sang;  and  if  he 
encounters a guru with the uttam gnãn, then the highest nishchay will 
develop.  Otherwise, such nishchay would develop after many lives.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Loyã || 12 || 120 || 
 
 
Loyã – 13 
Not Being Overcome By Unpleasant Circumstances 
 
13.1
 In  the  early  morning  of Mãgshar  vad 10  [30
th
 December,  1820], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated 
bedstead in Surã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Loyã.    He  was  wearing  a  red, 
woollen dagli and  a  white khes.    He had  tied  a  white feto around His 
head,  and  had  tied  a bokãni with  another  white feto.    In  addition  to 
this,   He   had   covered   Himself   with   a   white chofãl.      A sabhã of 
paramhans, as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered 
before Him. 
 
13.2
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  told  the  senior paramhans to  ask  questions 
amongst  themselves.    So,  Gopãlãnand  Swãmi  asked Brahmãnand 
Swãmi, “What type of person is overcome by unpleasant desh, kãl, 
kriyã, and sang; and what type of person is not overcome?  After all, it 
is  said  that  even Brahmã was  infatuated  upon  seeing  Sarasvati,  as 
was Shivji when he saw Mohini.  So, please answer carefully, because 
even    such    great devs have    been    overcome    by    unpleasant 
circumstances.” 
 
13.3
 Brahmãnand  Swãmi  attempted  to  answer,  but  could  not  give  an 
adequate reply. 
 
13.4
 So, Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “A person who has withdrawn his 
nãdis and prãns, and by way of his nirvikalp state remains at the holy 

LOYÃ 
- 359 - 
feet  of Bhagvãn,  would  not  be  overcome  by  unpleasant desh, kãl, 
kriyã,  and sang, even  if  he  was  an  insignificant  being.    In  fact,  if 
Brahmã and  other devs behave  in  this  way;  they  would  also  not  be 
overcome.    However,  if  he  has  not  developed  such  a  state,  and 
instead,  behaves  as  if  he  is  the  body,  then  average  beings,  as  well  as 
great devs, would be overcome.  If this were not so, then the meaning 
of the following shlok would not be true: 
 
tat-shrushta-shrushta-shrushteshu konvakhandita-dheehee pumãn 
rushim nãrayanam-rute yoshin-mãyyeha mãyayã 
Of the progeny of Brahmã (Marichi), and their progeny (Kashyap), and their 
progeny (humans and devs) – whose mind in this world, besides that of 
Nãrãyan Rushi, can be distinguished as being unaffected by the mãyã and 
attractive charm of women? 
 
13.5
 “Therefore, Bhagvãn alone   is   not   overcome   by   those  influences.  
While  all  others,  no  matter  how  great  they  may  be,  if  they  are  not 
engrossed  in  the  holy  feet  of Bhagvãn,  would  be  overcome;  those 
who  do  remain  engrossed  are  not  overcome.    This  is  a  universal 
principle that I have firmly established within myself. 
 
13.6
 “Moreover, it is mentioned in the Shreemad Bhãgvat: 
 
etad-eeshanam-eehasya prakrutisthopi tad-gunahee 
na yujyate sadãtmasthair-yathã buddhis-tad-ãshrayã 
Just as a person’s buddhi (knowledge of Bhagvãn) is not affected by the 
characteristics of the body (such as birth, death, age, illness), similarly, 
Bhagvãn, who pervades Prakruti, is forever unaffected by their influences and 
the influences of ãtmãs.  This is the ability of Bhagvãn. 
 
13.7
 “Krishna Bhagvãn has also said: 
 
daivee hyeshã guna-mayee mama mãyã duratyayã 
mãm-eva ye prapadyante mãyãm-etam taranti te 
My mãyã, which I have created and is composed of the three gun, is indeed 
difficult to rise above.  However, those who take refuge in me alone can rise 
above that mãyã. 

LOYÃ 
- 360 - 
13.8
 “Therefore, only Bhagvãn remains unaffected by mãyã; and a person 
who   has   realised Bhagvãn through   a nirvikalp state   is   also   not 
overcome  by mãyã.    On  the  other  hand,  someone  who  has  realised 
Bhagvãn through a savikalp state would still be overcome, no matter 
how great he may be.” 
 
13.9
 Then,  Nityãnand  Swãmi  asked,  “Mahãrãj,  as  long  as  a mukta is 
associated  with  the  three gun (sattva-gun, rajo-gun, tamo-gun),  he is 
affected  by desh, kãl, kriyã,  and sang.    However,  it  is  accepted  that 
Bhagvãn is  not  influenced  by desh, kãl, kriyã,  and sang – even  while 
He  remains  with  the gun.    However,  when  all  the muktas are  free 
from the association of the gun, and have become nirgun, they dwell 
in Akshardhãm along  with Bhagvãn – who  dwells  there  in  the  same 
way; and all the muktas are nirgun, and composed of chaitanya.  Also, 
as  explained  by ‘mama sãdharmya-mãgatãha’,  they  have  attained 
qualities   similar   to   those   of Bhagvãn.      Then,   how   should   we 
understand the distinction between the muktas and Bhagvãn?” 
 
13.10
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “Look at the moon and the stars.  Is there 
not  a  difference  between  the  two?    They  are  not  similar  in  terms  of 
brightness,  and  there  is  a  vast  difference  between  the  intensity  of 
their  rays.    All the  herbs  are  nourished  by  the  moon,  but  not  by  the 
stars.    Also, it  is  the moon  that  dispels  the  darkness  of  the  night,  not 
the stars.  Bhagvãn and the muktas differ in the same way. 
 
13.11
 “Also, a king and his servant are both the same, as they both are 
humans; yet the authority, power, beauty, and charm of the king are 
far  more  superior.    His  servant,  regardless  of  how  great  he  may  be, 
cannot   achieve   what   the   king   can   achieve.      In   the   same   way, 
Purushottam Nãrãyan is the all-doer, the cause of all, the controller of 
all;  He  is  extremely  attractive,  extremely  radiant,  and  extremely 
powerful;  also,  He  possesses kartum, akartum,  and anyathã-kartum  
powers.    If  He  wishes,  He  can  conceal  all  the muktas of Akshardhãm 
by His own divine light and prevail alone.  Also, if He wishes, He can 

LOYÃ 
- 361 - 
accept the bhakti of the muktas and reside with them.  He can conceal 
even Akshar,  in  the svarup of Akshardhãm,  in  which  He  dwells,  and 
preside  alone.    If  He  so  chooses,  He  is  capable  of  supporting  the 
countless muktas by    His    own    power,    without    even    needing 
Akshardhãm.    For  example, Pruthu Bhagvãn told Pruthvi, ‘I can kill 
you with the arrow from my bow and still be able to support the whole 
world by my powers’.  Likewise,  through  His  powers, Bhagvãn reigns 
as the supreme lord.  A person who equates Bhagvãn with Akshar and 
the  other muktas should  be  regarded  as  evil-minded  and  as  a  great 
sinner.    A  person  should  avoid  even  looking  at  him.    In  fact,  merely 
looking at such a person is as sinful as committing the five great sins. 
 
13.12
 “Of  course,  by  considering  their  association  with Bhagvãn,   it   is 
acceptable to grant greatness upon anyone.  Brahmã, Shiv, Nãrad, the 
Sanakãdik,  and  Uddhav  can  all  be  called Bhagvãn because  of  their 
association  with Bhagvãn.    At  present,  even  a sãdhu like  Muktãnand 
Swãmi   can   be   considered   to   be   like Bhagvãn because   of   his 
association  with Bhagvãn.    However,  without Bhagvãn,  even Akshar 
cannot be called Bhagvãn – let alone anyone else. 
 
13.13
 “This Vedic shlok reflects the same truth: 
 
aparimitã dhurvãs-tanubhruto yadi sarvagatãs-tarhi 
na shãsyateti niyamo dhruva netarathã 
O loyal Bhagvãn!  If the embodied jeevs, which are innumerable and eternal, 
are believed to be all-pervasive, then they would not be governable.  Not 
believing them as all-pervasive would not cause any discrepancies. 
 
“If this were not so, then why would we – despite regarding ourselves 
to  be brahm-rup,  and  distinct  from  the  body,  and  possessing gnãn 
and vairãgya – try  to  please Bhagvãn by  staying  up  day  and  night, 
clapping, singing kirtans, and chanting His holy name tirelessly?  Why 
would  we  engage  in kathãs  and  talks  day  and  night,  and  encourage 
others  to  do  so  as  well?    Why  would  we  make  so  much  effort  if  we 
could   become   like Bhagvãn?      Therefore,   only Bhagvãn is   like 

LOYÃ 
- 362 - 
Bhagvãn;  no  one  can  become  like  Him.    The  Vedic shlok ‘ekam-
evãdviteeyam  brahm’ also   explains   that Bhagvãn alone   is   like 
Bhagvãn.  This is the principle of all the shãstras.” 
 
13.14
 In  this  way,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  addressed  the bhaktas for  their  benefit, 
when in reality He Himself is Purushottam Nãrãyan. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Loyã || 13 || 121 || 
 
 
Loyã – 14 
Personal Preference Of Shreeji Mahãrãj 
 
14.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Mãgshar  vad 11  [31
st
 December,  1820], 
Shreeji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated   bedstead   in   Surã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in Loyã.  He was wearing a white khes, and had tied 
a  white feto around  His  head.    He  had  covered  Himself  with  a  white 
chãdar.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various 
places, had gathered before Him. 
 
14.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said to the paramhans, “All the ãchãryas of the 
past  have  had  differing  beliefs.    Of  them,  Shankar  Swãmi  seems  to 
have leaned predominately towards the Advait principle.  Rãmanuj’s 
principle    is    that jeevs, Mãyã,    and Purushottam are    eternal; 
Purushottam is   the   controller   of   the jeevs   and Mãyã;   He   is   the 
ultimate cause of all; He forever dwells in His Akshardhãm in a divya 
svarup;  all avatãrs originate  from  Him;  and  it  is  this Purushottam 
Nãrãyan that    should    be    worshiped.        This    seems    to    be    the 
understanding  of  Rãmanuj.    Vallabh-Ãchãrya  seems  to  have  intense 
faith only in bhakti.  All these ãchãryas have occasionally referred to 
other  principles  in  their  own shãstras,  but  ultimately,  in  one  way  or 
another,  they  have  leaned  towards  their  own  personal  preference.  
Their  views  can  be  accurately  understood  from  the  statements  in 
their shãstras. 

LOYÃ 
- 363 - 
14.3
 “In the same way, having listened to my talks, what have all of you 
realised  my  personal  preference  to  be?    Just  as  a  thread  passes 
through the eye of a needle, or a thread runs through each and every 
bead  of  a mãlã,  which  principle  is  consistently  interwoven  in  all  of 
my talks?  Please state your beliefs.” 
 
14.4
 All the senior paramhans spoke according to their understanding. 
 
14.5
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “Here,  allow  me  to  reveal  my  own 
principles and preferences. 
 
14.6
 “First of all, I like the fact that although Rushabh-Dev Bhagvãn had 
attained  oneness  with Vãsudev,  and  despite  being Bhagvãn Himself, 
when siddhi appeared  before  Him,  He  did  not  accept  them  because 
He  wished  to  set  an  example  for  all tyãgis.    Also,  the  Shreemad 
Bhãgvat  states:   ‘Even an accomplished yogi should never trust his 
mind – even though he may appear to have conquered it’.   
 
14.7
 “There are also these shloks: 
 
na kuryat-karhichit-sakhyam manasi hyanavasthite 
yadvistram-bhãchirãch-cheernam chaskanda tapa aishvaram 
Never befriend the mind because it is very unstable; it has even destroyed the 
tap of the devs that were accumulated after extensive activities over a great 
period of time.  
 
nityam dadãti kãmasya-chhidram tam-anu yerayaha 
yoginaha kruta-maitrasya patyur-jãyeva punshchalee 
The minds of those yogis who have befriended their minds continuously allow 
kãm to enter.  Other enemies, such as krodh, lobh, and moh, follow the kãm 
into the mind.  In this way, the mind brings about the downfall of the yogis, 
just as an unfaithful wife brings about the downfall of her trusting husband. 
 
 “In this way, I like a tyãgi who does not trust his mind. 
 

LOYÃ 
- 364 - 
14.8
 “Also, in my mind I do not like other loks as much as I like Shvet-Dvip 
and Badrikãshram.    In  fact,  I  feel  that  it  would  be  very  good  to  go 
there to perform tap without any food.  I would prefer not to indulge 
in the various types of pleasures of the other loks. 
 
14.9
 “Furthermore, I realise that the many avatãrs are  all  ultimately  of 
Bhagvãn; yet, among these avatãrs, I like Rushabh-Dev greatly.  I also 
like Kapil-Dev and Dattãtrey equally,  but  to  a  lesser  extent  than 
Rushabh-Dev.  But, more than these three, I have a million-fold more 
love for the avatãr of Shree Krishna.  I feel, ‘This avatãr is greater and 
more powerful than all the others.  Also, in him, a person cannot make 
the distinction of the avatãr and the source of the avatãr’.  On  the 
other  hand,  I  do  not  have  a  great  liking  for  the  other avatãrs of 
Bhagvãn, such as Matsya and Kurma. 
 
14.10
 “In addition to this, my understanding is as follows:  There is a great 
mass of divine light, which cannot be measured from above, below, or 
in  any  of  the  four  directions;  it  is  endless.    Amidst  this  mass  of  light 
lies  a  large sinhãsan,  upon  which  presides  the divya murti of Shree 
Nãrãyan Purushottam Bhagvãn.    Countless  millions  of muktas are 
seated  around  that sinhãsan,  enjoying  the darshan of Bhagvãn.    I 
constantly  see  Him  accompanied  by  the muktas.    Moreover,  that 
Bhagvãn is extremely luminous.  At times, when I cannot see Bhagvãn 
with  the sabhã of muktas due  to  this  luminosity,  I  feel  deeply  hurt.  
Despite being able to constantly see this mass of divine light, I am not 
fascinated by it; I experience profound bliss only from the darshan of 
Bhagvãn’s murti.  This is my upãsanã. 
 
14.11
 “Moreover, I like the bhakti that the gopis had towards Bhagvãn.  For 
this reason, I continuously observe people, and having seen the love a 
lustful woman has for a man, or a lustful man has for a woman, I feel, 
‘It would be good to have such love for Bhagvãn’.  Also, whenever I see 
someone having great love for their son, or their money, I again feel, 
‘It  would  be  good to  have  such  love  for  Bhagvãn’.  That  is  why 
whenever  I  hear  someone  singing,  I  would  either  send  someone  to 

LOYÃ 
- 365 - 
that person, or I would personally go there, and I would feel, ‘What he 
is doing, is very good’. 
 
14.12
 “Also, I only get along with a person who has no svabhãvs,  such  as 
kãm, krodh, lobh, mãn, irshyã, kapat, svãd, sneh, dambh; a person who 
follows dharma as  prescribed  in  the  Dharma-Shãstras;  and  a  person 
who has bhakti towards Bhagvãn.  I enjoy the company of only such a 
person.  If a person is not like that, then I do not get along with him, 
even if he is staying close to me.  In fact, I feel a dislike towards them. 
 
14.13
 “Initially, I had a strong dislike for anyone with kãm.  However, now I 
have  a  strong  dislike  for  those  who  have krodh, mãn,  or irshyã.    The 
reason is that a person with kãm passes his days in satsang by being 
humble – like  a grahastha bhakta;  but  as  for  those  who  have krodh, 
mãn, or irshyã, they can be seen to definitely regress in satsang.  For 
this reason, I am deeply saddened by these types of people. 
 
14.14
 “What is mãn like?    Well,  a  person  with mãn remains  arrogant  even 
before those who are superior to him; he cannot become humble and 
serve them. 
 
14.15
 “Now, allow me to summarise my preferences in brief.  I do not agree 
with Shankar Swãmi’s belief of Advait principle.  Rãmãnuj  Swãmi 
describes Purushottam Bhagvãn as  greater  than  the  perishable  and 
the  imperishable;  I  worship  that Purushottam Bhagvãn.    My bhakti 
towards  that Purushottam Bhagvãn is  like  that  of  the gopis,  and  the 
qualities of vairãgya and ãtmã-nishthã within me are like Shukji’s and 
Jadbharat’s.  These are my principles and preferences.  Intelligent 
bhaktas can  realise  this  if  they  analyse  my  talks  as  well  as  the 
shãstras of  our sampradãy which  have  been  accepted  by  me  as 
trustworthy.” 
 
14.16
 Therefore,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  spoke  for  the  sake  of  His bhaktas,  while 
He Himself is Purushottam Nãrãyan. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Loyã || 14 || 122 || 

LOYÃ 
- 366 - 
Loyã – 15 
Ãtmã-Darshan 
 
15.1
 In the Samvat year 1877, on the night of Mãgshar vad 13 [2
nd
 January, 
1821], Shreeji Mahãrãj was sitting in Surã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Loyã.  
He  was  wearing  a  warm,  red dagli and  a  white khes.    He  had  tied  a 
white feto around His head, and had tied a bokãni with another white 
feto.    In  addition  to  this, He  had  covered  Himself with  a chofãl and  a 
pachhedi.  A sabhã of paramhans, as well as haribhaktas from various 
places, had gathered before Him. 
 
15.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said out of compassion, “The jeev pervades the 
entire  body  from  head  to  toe  through  its  three  powers  of adhyãtma, 
adhibhut,  and adhidev.    Through  the indriyas,  and  their  presiding 
devs, it experiences the vishays, but it cannot experience anything by 
being distinct from the presiding devs and the indriyas.” 
 
15.3
 Then, Nityãnand Swãmi raised a doubt:  “Mahãrãj, it is said that the 
jeev pervades  the  whole  body  in  general,  but  resides  specifically 
within  the  heart.  So,  how  should  a  person  understand  the  fact  that 
awareness is not present everywhere equally?” 
 
15.4
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “The sun pervades each and every object 
equally  by  its  rays,  but  its  light  is  seen  according  to  the  object  it 
shines  upon.    For example,  pure  sunlight  is  not  experienced  as 
intensely on stone or sand or in dirty water as it is on a floor made of 
glass  or  in  clean  water.    Therefore,  just  as  a  person  experiences  a 
greater and lesser intensity in the sun’s light, in the same way, even 
though the jeev resides equally in the indriyas, the antah-karans, and 
the  organs  of  the indriyas,  a  person  experiences  its  power  more 
intensely in the indriyas because of their purity.  For example, does a 
person experience as much sensation in his nose and ears as he does 
in  his  eyes?    Certainly  not.    Furthermore,  the  four antah-karans  are 
even   purer   than   the indriyas,   and   so   the jeev’s power   can   be 

LOYÃ 
- 367 - 
experienced   there   even   more   intensely.      In   comparison,   it   is 
experienced to a lesser degree in the indriyas.  Nevertheless, the jeev 
does pervade the entire body equally.” 
 
15.5
 Then, Brahmãnand Swãmi asked, “Many see the jeev to be like a star, 
or  like  the  flame  of  an  oil  lamp,  or  like  the  flash  from  a  firecracker.  
How should a person understand these differences in experiences?” 
 
15.6
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “Just as a person who has mastered akshi-
vidyã can see the jeev and the murti of Bhagvãn within with his eyes, 
a  person  who  has  realised  the ãtmã through  the indriyas sees  the 
ãtmã in  a  similar  way.   For  example,  if  there  was  a  glass-statue 
shaped  in  the svarup of  a  human – with  all  of  its  limbs,  hair,  and 
vessels  made  of  glass – and  if  it  were  filled  with  light,  then  the  light 
would  be  seen  only  according  to  the  size  and  shape  of  the  tubes 
within;  it would  not  be  seen  everywhere.    In  the  very  same  way, 
people  describe  the  nature  of  the jeev according  to  however  they 
have  seen  it.    However,  because  they  have  not  attained nirãvaran 
drashti,  they  do  not  see  the ãtmã as  it  is.    However,  when  a  person 
who  has  not  attained nirãvaran  drashti and  is  one  with  his ãtmã,  he 
no  longer  perceives  the  divisions  of  the  different  organs  of  the 
indriyas; instead, he realises the ãtmã as it truly is. 
 
15.7
 “Just as a person who has attained the viewpoint of ãkãsh does  not 
perceive  the  other  four bhuts,  similarly,  a  person  with nirãvaran 
drashti does  not  perceive  differences  in  the jeev’s light  arising  from 
its indriyas,  their  organs  and  presiding devs,  and  the antah-karans; 
instead,  he  realises  the jeev precisely  as  it  is.    On  the  other  hand,  a 
person  who  perceives  distinctions  does  not  realise  the jeev as  it  is.  
For  example,  from  a  group  of  people,  one  person  saw  the  tail  of  a 
cow, one person saw its mouth, one person saw its hoof, one person 
saw  its  belly,  and  one  person  saw  its  udder.    Whichever  part  of  the 
cow   was   seen,   belonged   to   the   cow,   yet   no   one   saw   the   cow 
completely.    However,  because  at  least  one  part  was  seen,  it  can  be 

LOYÃ 
- 368 - 
said that the cow was actually seen.  In the same way, a person can be 
said  to  have  had  the darshan of  the ãtmã to  the  extent  to  which  he 
has  seen  the  light  of  the ãtmã through  his indriyas or antah-karans.  
However,  this  cannot  be  said  to  be  perfect darshan of  the ãtmã.  
Therefore,  I  have  explained  the  general  and  the  specific  experiences 
of the jeev in this way.”  
 
15.8
 At  that  point,  Nityãnand  Swãmi  questioned,  “Mahãrãj,  you  have 
described the jeev as being nirãkãr.  Therefore, when Bhagvãn dwells 
within the jeev, does He reside without a svarup, or does He possess a 
svarup?” 
 
15.9
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  clarified,  “Bhagvãn dwells   as   the   refuge   of   the 
indriyas,  the antah-karans,  their  presiding devs,  and  the jeev.    For 
example, Shree Krishna Bhagvãn made Uddhavji explain to the gopis, 
‘I am near to you by being the refuge of your indriyas,  antah-karans, 
their  presiding  devs,  and  the  jeev.    Just  as  the  very  same  five  mahã-
bhuts which reside in the brahmãnds are also within everyone’s body, 
similarly, I reside in Mathurã like the mahã-bhuts reside predominantly 
in  the  brahmãnds;  but  just  like  those  mahã-bhuts  reside  subtly  in  the 
bodies of the jeevs, I also reside within all of you.  The fact that I cannot 
be  seen  is  to  keep  the  vrutti  of  your  mind  confined  within  me;  that  is 
why I cannot be seen.  Nevertheless, I reside within you, and I possess a 
definite murti’.” 
 
15.10
 Hearing this, Nityãnand Swãmi questioned further, “Mahãrãj, does 
Bhagvãn,  who  resides  as  the  refuge  of  the indriyas, antah-karans, 
their  presiding devs, and  the jeev,  reside  in  the svarup of Purush, 
Akshar, or as Purushottam Himself?” 
 
15.11
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The light of the jeev, Purush, Akshar,  and 
Purushottam is very similar in terms of luminosity.  So much so, that 
no  one  is  capable  of  distinguishing  between  their  light.    However, 
they are absolutely distinct from each other, but no one is capable of 

LOYÃ 
- 369 - 
seeing  these  distinctions.   Only  a  person  who  receives  a  divine  body 
composed of divine light by the grace of Bhagvãn realises, ‘This is my 
own self, this is Purush, this is Akshar, and this is Purushottam – who is 
distinct from all’.  In this way, a person can see them separately, and 
their    light    distinctly.        However,    no    one    else    is    capable    of 
distinguishing  between  them.    Therefore, Bhagvãn may  reside  in 
whichever svarup He chooses, but it is He Himself who resides within 
the jeev – no one else.” 
 
15.12
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj continued, “There are three sets of shãstras 
which  are  eternal   and  which   describe   only   the svarup of Shree 
Krishna Bhagvãn.        They    are    Yog,   Sãnkhya,   and    Vedãnt    (the 
Upanishads).    I  shall  now  explain  the  principles  of  each,  so  please 
listen. 
 
15.13
 “Those belonging to the Sãnkhya philosophy propose the existence of 
twenty-four tattvas and  believe  that Bhagvãn is  greater  than  them; 
that  is, Bhagvãn is  the  twenty-fifth tattva.    However,  they  do  not 
accept jeev and ishvar as being distinct from the twenty-four tattvas.  
Their  reasoning  is  that  the tattvas cannot  be  sustained  without  the 
jeev;  so  the jeev is  imagined  only  as  a  form  of  the tattvas because  of 
its close co-existence with them.  As a result, they do not consider the 
jeev to  be  distinct.    Also,  just as  they  regard  the jeev as a  form  of  the 
tattvas,  they  regard  the ishvars as  a  form  of  the  twenty-four tattvas.  
In this way, they imagine both jeev and ishvar among the twenty-four 
tattvas,  and  therefore  count  them  together  with  the  twenty-four 
tattvas; they do not consider them as being distinct from the tattvas.  
This, along with believing Bhagvãn to be the twenty-fifth tattva, is the 
philosophy of Sãnkhya. 
 
15.14
 “Despite this, a person should not conclude that there is no jeev at all, 
because  the  proposers  of  Sãnkhya  have  prescribed  the  six spiritual 
activities  (shat-sampatti – sham, dam, uparati,   titikshã, samãdhãn, 
and shraddhã) as well as shravan, manan, and nididhyãs, for the jeev.  

LOYÃ 
- 370 - 
By  behaving  in  this  way,  the jeev attains  a  thought  that  eventually 
leads  to  the  realisation  of  its  distinction  from  the tattvas.    Then,  a 
person  engages  in  the  worship  of Bhagvãn,  realising  himself  to  be 
brahm-rup.    This  is  the  Sãnkhya  philosophy.    It  is  also  mentioned  in 
the Moksh-Dharma, where Nãradji explains to Shukdevji: 
 
tyaja dharmam-adharma cha ubhe satyanrute tyaja 
ubhe satyanrute tyaktvã yena tyajasi tat-tyaja 
 
“The meaning of this shlok is  that  when  a mumukshu prepares  to 
think about his ãtmã, he should abandon all thoughts of dharma and 
adharma, satya and asatya, which disturb him.  In fact, he should also 
abandon the thought by which he abandons these other thoughts.  In 
this  way,  he  should  behave  as brahm-rup.    However,  the shlok does 
not  suggest  that  a  person  should  physically  abandon  the niyams in 
the form of dharma.  This is the correct interpretation of the shlok. 
 
15.15
 “Next, proposers of the Yog philosophy promote the twenty-four 
tattvas distinctly  from  the jeev and ishvar,  whom  they  regard  as  the 
twenty-fifth tattva, and Bhagvãn as the twenty-sixth.  With the power 
of  discrimination  they  distinguish  the  twenty-fifth tattva (jeev)  from 
the other tattvas, and after firmly resolving that to be their form, they 
gather  the vruttis of  the  twenty-four tattvas and  forcefully  attach 
them to the twenty-sixth tattva (Bhagvãn); they do not allow them to 
be  drawn  towards  the vishays.    They  believe, ‘If my vruttis abandon 
Bhagvãn and wander elsewhere, I will have to pass through the cycle of 
births and deaths’.  Therefore,  they  forcibly  keep  the vruttis of  their 
indriyas and antah-karans on Bhagvãn. 
 
15.16
 “In comparison, the proposers of Sãnkhya believe, ‘I have no indriyas 
or  antah-karans,  so  where  shall  the  vruttis  go?’  Therefore,  they 
consider  themselves  to  be brahm-rup and  remain  fearless.    Those 
belonging  to  the  Yog  philosophy  remain  constantly  fearful.    For 
example,  if  a  person  had  to  carry  a  pot  filled  to  the  brim  with  oil  up 
some stairs without spilling any oil at all, and if two swordsmen with 

LOYÃ 
- 371 - 
drawn swords were on both sides trying to frighten him, that person 
would be extremely afraid.  Followers of Yog remain just as afraid of 
the vishays and  strive  to  keep  their vrutti fixed  on Bhagvãn.    This  is 
the philosophy of Yog. 
 
15.17
 “Vedãnt (the Upanishads) explains only Bhagvãn, who is the ultimate 
cause of all, as being the truth; they claim all else to be false.  Just as 
when  a  person  attains  the  viewpoint  of ãkãsh,  he  does  not  perceive 
the  other tattvas,  in  the  same  way,  a  person  who  sees  only brahm, 
perceives nothing else.  That is the philosophy of Vedãnt.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Loyã || 15 || 123 || 
 
 
Loyã – 16 
Worldly Desires Becoming Blunt And Uprooted 
 
16.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  after  the sandhyã ãrti on Mãgshar  vad 14 
[3
rd
 January,   1821],   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated 
bedstead in Surã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Loyã.  He was wearing a white 
khes and a warm, red dagli.  He has also tied a white feto around His 
head,  and  had  tied  a bokãni with  another  white feto.    A sabhã of 
paramhans, as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered 
before Him.  
 
16.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “May the paramhans please  engage  in  a 
question-answer discussion.” 
 
16.3
 Then,  Mahãrãj  Himself  asked  a  question:    “What  are  the 
characteristics  of  a  person  whose  worldly  desires  have  not  become 
blunt, whose worldly desires have become blunt, and whose worldly 
desires have been completely uprooted?” 
 
16.4
 Muktãnand Swãmi began to answer the question, but could not reply 
adequately. 

LOYÃ 
- 372 - 
16.5
 So, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “The vruttis of  the indriyas of  a  person 
whose worldly desires have not become blunt, cling to the vishays.  In 
fact,   they   cannot   be   dislodged   even   by   a   thought   process.      In 
comparison,  the vruttis of  a  person  whose  worldly  desires  have 
become  blunt  do  not  enter  the vishays immediately.    If  the vruttis 
were  to  enter  the vishays,  and  he  attempts  to  withdraw  them,  they 
would  withdraw  instantly;  they  would  not  remain  attached  to  the 
vishays.    However,  a  person  whose  worldly  desires  have  become 
completely  uprooted  is  unaware  of  the vishays during  the jãgrat 
state,  just  as  he  is  during  the sushupti state.  He  would  regard  all 
pleasant  and  unpleasant vishays as  equal  and  would  behave  as  a 
person who is gunãtit.” 
 
16.6
 Then,  Gopãlãnand Swãmi asked, “A person’s worldly desires may 
have  become  blunt,  but  what  is  the  reason  for  them  not  being 
removed from their roots?” 
 
16.7
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  explained,  “The  answer  is  that  if  a  person  has 
perfectly  absorbed  the  following  four  qualities,  then  his  worldly 
desires will become uprooted:  gnãn in the form of knowledge of that 
ãtmã; vairãgya in  the  form  of  detachment  from  all  things  that  have 
evolved  out  of Prakruti; dharma in  the  form  of brahm-chãrya;  and 
bhakti coupled  with  the  knowledge  of Bhagvãn’s greatness.    Any 
deficiency in  these  four  qualities  leads  to  a  deficiency  in uprooting  a 
person’s worldly desires.” 
 
16.8
 Having given the reply, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Now, allow me to ask a 
question.    Countless  spiritual  activities  have  been  prescribed  for  a 
mumukshu to perform in order to attain Bhagvãn.  Out of all of them, 
by which one powerful activity can all flaws be eradicated and all gun 
be acquired?” 
 
16.9
 The paramhans could not answer the question. 
 

LOYÃ 
- 373 - 
16.10
 So, Shreeji Mahãrãj revealed, “If a person has bhakti coupled with the 
knowledge  of Bhagvãn’s countless  powers  as  described  by Kapil-Dev 
to Devhuti, then all of his flaws would be eradicated: 
 
mad-bhayãd-vãti vãto-yam suryas-tapati mad-bhayãt 
It is by fear of me that Vãyu (wind) blows, Surya (sun) shines, Indra (clouds) 
rains, Agni (fire) burns, and Yam (death) devours the living 
 
“Moreover, even if a person does not possess gnãn, vairãgya,  and 
dharma,  he  still  attains  them.   Therefore,  this spiritual  activity  is  the 
best of all.” 
 
16.11
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked another question:  “A person with kapat, 
who is also clever, cunningly conceals his kapat.  Please explain how 
such a person’s kapat can be recognised?” 
 
16.12
 Brahmãnand Swãmi answered, “Such a person can be recognised by 
the  fact  that  he  keeps  the  company  of  someone  who  is  an  enemy  of 
satsang and  who  speaks  unkindly  of Bhagvãn and  His sant.    Such  a 
person cannot be known by any other means.” 
 
16.13
 Shreeji Mahãrãj accepted the answer, but questioned further, “Yes, 
but  how  can  such  a  person  be  recognised  if  he  does  not  keep  the 
company of such people?” 
 
16.14
 Brahmãnand Swãmi then added, “His kapat would  be  exposed  in 
times of difficult circumstances.” 
 
16.15
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  confirmed,  “That  is  the  correct  answer  to  the 
question.” 
 
16.16
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked another question:  “Which single avgun 
transforms all of a person’s gun to avgun?” 
 
16.17
 Shreepãt Devãnand Swãmi replied, “If someone criticises a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn, then all of his gun become as good as avgun.” 

LOYÃ 
- 374 - 
16.18
 Shreeji Mahãrãj clarified, “That is true, but I had another answer in 
mind.  A person may well be endowed with each and every gun, but if 
he believes Bhagvãn to be nirãkãr, then that is a great flaw.  So much 
so, that because of this avgun, all of his gun become avgun.” 
 
16.19
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Why does a person perceive avgun in a 
sãdhu?” 
 
16.20
 The paramhans attempted  to  answer  the  question,  but  were  unable 
to give a precise answer. 
 
16.21
 So, Shreeji Mahãrãj answered the question Himself:  “A person with 
mãn perceives avgun in a sãdhu.  This is because it is the very nature 
of  someone  who  has mãn,  that  if  someone  praises  him,  even  though 
that person may have a hundred avgun, he would overlook them and 
would instead  greatly  highlight a single gun.    Conversely,  if  a  person 
does  not  praise  him,  then  even  though  that  person  may have  a 
hundred gun,  he  would  overlook  all  of  them and  highlight  an  utterly 
insignificant avgun.  Consequently, he would initially spite the person 
mentally, then verbally, and ultimately physically as well.  Therefore, 
mãn is  a  great  flaw.    However,  do  not  think  that  only  the  wise  have 
mãn and  the  naïve  do  not.    In  actual  fact,  the  naïve  have  more mãn 
than the wise.” 
 
16.22
 Then,  Muktãnand  Swãmi  asked,  “Mahãrãj,  how  can mãn be 
eradicated?” 
 
16.23
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  explained, “A person who thoroughly realises the 
greatness of Bhagvãn does not have mãn.  Look at Uddhavji, and how 
wise  he  was!    He  was  skilled  in  the  Niti-Shãstra,  and  had  physical 
characteristics like that of a king.  However, as he had understood the 
greatness  of Bhagvãn,  he  put  aside  his mãn upon  seeing  the  love  of 
the gopis for Bhagvãn,  and  prayed, ‘May I become a tree, a vine, a 
blade grass, or maybe a shrub – anything that has been touched by the 
dust from the feet of the gopis’. 

LOYÃ 
- 375 - 
16.24
 “Tulsidãs has also said:  
 
tulsee jyake mukhanse bhoole nikase rãm 
tãke pag kee paheniyãm mere tan kee chãm 
 
“This  means  that  even  if  someone  utters  the  name  of Bhagvãn 
unintentionally,  a  person  who  realises Bhagvãn’s greatness  would 
make shoes from his own skin and offer them to that person.  If that 
is  so,  would  he  have  any mãn before  a bhakta of Bhagvãn who 
constantly  engages  himself  in  worship  and  in  chanting  the  name  of 
Bhagvãn,   who   bows   down   to Bhagvãn,   and   who   realises   the 
greatness  of Bhagvãn?    Certainly  not.    Therefore, mãn is  eradicated 
when   a   person   realises   the   greatness   of Bhagvãn,   but   without 
understanding   the   greatness  of Bhagvãn, mãn simply  cannot   be 
eradicated.    Therefore,  whoever  wishes  to  eradicate mãn should 
realise the greatness of Bhagvãn and His sant.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Loyã || 16 || 124 || 
 
 
Loyã – 17 
Not Perceiving Avgun 
 
17.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on  the  night  of Mãgshar  vad  Amãs [4
th
 
January  1821],  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead 
in Surã Khãchar’s darbãr in Loyã.  He had tied a white feto around His 
head,  and  had  tied  a bokãni with  another  white feto.    He  was  also 
wearing a warm, red dagli with a white angarkhu inside.  He was also 
wearing  a  white khes.    In  addition  to  this,  He  had  covered  Himself 
with  a chofãl,  over  which  He  had  wrapped  a  yellow rajãi.    Shreeji 
Mahãrãj  was  in  a  pleasant  mood.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
17.2
 Then, of His own will, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “See how powerful the 
force of Bhagvãn’s mãyã is!  It can cause great wickedness.  Someone 

LOYÃ 
- 376 - 
who  previously  seemed  very  good,  can  suddenly  become  extremely 
evil.” 
 
17.3
 So  saying,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  urged  the paramhans,  “Ask questions 
today, so that we can talk.” 
 
17.4
 Then,  Nityãnand  Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, the very same person who 
was  previously  good  and  who  prays  to Bhagvãn,  later  begins  to 
criticise Him.  How can a good person remain good and never let his 
understanding  become  impaired,  amidst  even  the  most  unpleasant 
desh, kãl, kriyã, and sang?” 
 
17.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “If a person is indifferent to his body, has 
firm ãtmã-nishthã,  maintains vairãgya towards  the panch-vishays, 
and has absolute nishchay in Bhagvãn coupled with the knowledge of 
His  greatness,  then  his  mind  will  never  become  distorted – even 
amidst the most unpleasant circumstances imaginable.  On the other 
hand,  a  person  who  believes  himself  to  be  the  body,  and  does  not 
have  an  intense  hatred  for  the panch-vishays,  would  spite  a sãdhu if 
he were to criticise the vishays, even though the sãdhu may be senior.  
Such a person would ultimately spite Bhagvãn as well.  Furthermore, 
if someone has firm nishchay in Bhagvãn, but lacks an extreme hatred 
towards the vishays and  is  still  attracted  to  them,  then  even  if  a 
person  like  Muktãnand  Swãmi  were  to  criticise  those  objects,  he 
would go as far as to cut off the person’s head with a sword in order 
to harm that person.” 
 
17.6
 “Nityãnand Swãmi then asked, “Someone may identify himself with 
the  body  and may  be  attracted  to  the panch-vishays;  yet  he seems  to 
survive in satsang.  How can this be explained?” 
 
17.7
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “He survives in satsang only as long as he is 
not  confronted  by  an  unpleasant  situation.    If  a  great sãdhu or 
Bhagvãn were to criticise his mãn, svãd, lobh, kãm, krodh, or his belief 
that  he  is  the  body,  then  he  would  surely  develop  a  dislike  for  the 
sãdhu.    Then,  he  would  certainly  insult  the sãdhu,  and  therefore  fall 

LOYÃ 
- 377 - 
from satsang.  For example, whoever has drank sweetened milk that 
has  been  poisoned  by  the  venom  of  a snake, even  though he  may  be 
living  at  present,  is  sure  to  die – within half  an  hour,  in  the morning 
or  in  the evening,  today  or  tomorrow;  eventually,  he  will  die.    In  the 
same  way,  he  who  identifies  himself  with  the  body,  will  definitely 
dislike  the sãdhu,  and  will  eventually  fall  from satsang – either  after 
one month or after two months; after one year or after two years or 
even  after ten  years;  or  maybe  at  the  time  of  death  or  even  after 
death – but he will certainly fall. 
 
17.8
 “In comparison, there is a person who does not identify himself with 
the   body   and   believes, ‘I  am  the  ãtmã,  due  to  which  this  body 
functions;   I   am   sachidãnand;   I   enlighten   the   indriyas   and   antah-
karans.    I  am  not  a  person  who  becomes  happy  by  possessing  wealth 
and  women;  nor  am  I  a  person  who  is  saddened  by  not  possessing 
them’.  Such a person never dislikes a sãdhu, no matter how strongly 
the sãdhu criticises the panch-vishays or the belief that he is the body.  
Furthermore,    he    would    never    quarrel    with    the sãdhu over 
insignificant issues, and nor would he hold a grudge against him.” 
 
17.9
 Then, Nityãnand Swãmi asked again, “How can a person recognise 
someone who has a hatred for the panch-vishays?” 
 
17.10
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “A person with a hatred for the panch-
vishays can  be  recognised  by  the following characteristics:   When he 
receives luxurious food, he would eat it, but he would not enjoy it as 
much  as  he  would  enjoy  eating  simple  food.    In  fact,  he  would  be 
troubled by it.  Also, he would become upset wearing fine clothes; he 
would  not  enjoy  them  as  much  as  he  would  enjoy  wearing tattered, 
coarse clothes.  In fact, his mind becomes troubled by fine clothes.  If 
he  were  to  receive  a  luxurious  bed,  or  if  someone  were  to  honour 
him,  or  if  he  were  to  receive  any  sort  of  pleasant  object,  his  mind 
would  become  troubled  by  it;  in  no  way would  he  be  pleased  by  it.  
On seeing such a person, a person should realise, ‘He has a hatred for 
the vishays’.” 

LOYÃ 
- 378 - 
17.11
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked another question, “Mahãrãj, how can 
a hatred for the panch-vishays be developed?” 
 
17.12
 Shreeji    Mahãrãj    explained,  “The  most  important  method  for 
developing  such  a  hatred  for  the panch-vishays,  is  the  knowledge  of 
Bhagvãn’s greatness, followed by ãtmã-nishthã and vairãgya. 
 
17.13
 “Now, what is this greatness of Bhagvãn?  Well, it is due to the fear of 
Bhagvãn that Indra rains;  that  the  sun,  the  moon,  and  flames  of  fire 
emit light; that the earth supports one and all; that the oceans do not 
exceed  their  boundaries;  and  that  the  herbs  produce  fruit  in  their 
appropriate seasons.  Also, it is Bhagvãn who is the creator, sustainer, 
and  destroyer  of  the  world,  and  whose  powers  include Kãl, Mãyã, 
Purush,  and Akshar.    Then,  what  object  in  the  world  can  attract 
someone who has understood the greatness of Bhagvãn in this way?  
Well,  not  even  kãm, krodh, lobh, mãn, irshyã, svãd,  fine  clothes, 
wealth, women, and none of the panch-vishays can bind him.  This is 
because he has assessed everything.  He knows, ‘Bhagvãn is like this, 
and these are the rewards of engaging in Bhagvãn’s worship and 
listening   to   kathãs   and   talks.      Akshar   is   like   this,   and   the   bliss 
associated  with  him  is  like  this.    Furthermore,  the  pleasures  of  Golok, 
Vaikunth,  and  Shvet-Dvip  are  like  this,  the  pleasures  of  Prakruti  and 
Purush  are  like  this,  the  pleasures  of  Brahm-Lok  are  like  this,  the 
pleasures of Svarg are like this, and the happiness of a kingdom is like 
this’. 
 
17.14
 “In this way, a person who has understood the happiness hidden 
within everything, realises the bliss of Bhagvãn to be the highest and 
then  attaches  himself  to  Him.    Is  there  any  object  in  the  world  that 
can  draw  him  away  from  the  holy  feet  of Bhagvãn?    There  is  none.  
For example, take a piece of iron.  Once touched by a pãrasmani, it is 
transformed  into  gold.    It cannot  be  transformed  back  into  iron;  not 
even by the pãrasmani itself.  Similarly, a person who has realised the 
greatness  of Bhagvãn cannot  be  made  to  fall  from  the  holy  feet  of 

LOYÃ 
- 379 - 
Bhagvãn, not even by Bhagvãn Himself.  Then, how could he be made 
to fall by any other object?  Of course he cannot. 
 
17.15
 “In addition to realising the greatness of Bhagvãn, such a person also 
deeply  realises  the  greatness  of  a sant who  worships Bhagvãn.    He 
feels, ‘This sant is truly great because he is a true bhakta of Bhagvãn’.  
For  example,  Uddhav  was  very  educated,  but  as  he  had  understood 
the  greatness  of Bhagvãn,  he  did  not  become  arrogant  due  to  his 
intelligence.  In fact, he yearned for the dust from the feet of the gopis, 
and  therefore  asked  to  be  reborn  as  a  vine.   The reason  for  this  was 
that  he  had  witnessed  the  profound  love  the gopis had  towards 
Bhagvãn,  whom  even  the shloks of  the  Veds  seek.    So,  how  can  a 
person  who  realises  the  greatness  of  a sant of Bhagvãn hold  any 
arrogance  before  a sant?    Why  could  he  not  bow down  to  him?    In 
actual fact, he would behave as a dãs of a dãs before a sant.  Even if a 
sant were to repeatedly physically mistreat him, he would tolerate it 
and would believe, ‘It is my great fortune that I am bearing the hatred 
of  such  a  sant.    Due  to my  prãrabdha,  I  would  have  been  forced  to 
endure the abuses of my wife and children, my parents, and the king.  I 
may even have had to eat the leaves of spinach and moss.  At least here, 
in  the  company  of  the  sant,  I  am  fortunate  enough  to  be  able  to  keep 
the  vow  of  nisvãd.    Due  to  my  prãrabdha,  I  may  have  been  forced  to 
wear  tattered  clothes  or  rags;  but  at  least  here  with  the  sant  I  am 
fortunate enough to have a blanket to cover myself with’. 
 
17.16
 “Conversely,  if  a  person  enters  a sabhã of sãdhus   and is   not 
appropriately   honoured   by   a sant,   and  if   he   then   has   a  dislike 
towards that sant, it implies that he has not realised the greatness of 
the sant;  otherwise  he  would  not  have  a  dislike  towards  the sant in 
that  way.    Consider  the  following  as  an  example:    If  the  British 
Governor of Mumbai were seated in an assembly, and if at that time a 
poor  man  were  to  enter  that  assembly,  but  was  not  given  a  seat  or 
welcomed  in  anyway,  would  the  poor  man  become  angry  with  the 
Governor?    Would  he  feel  like  swearing  at the  Governor?    Not  at  all.  
This  is  because  the  poor  man  has  realised  the  importance  of  the 

LOYÃ 
- 380 - 
British official, and thinks, ‘He is the ruler of the land, and I am a mere 
pauper’.  For this reason, he does not become upset.  In the same way, 
if  a  person  has realised  the  greatness  of  a sant,  then  regardless  of 
how  much  the sant hates  him,  he  would  never  become  upset  with 
that sant.  If fact, if he does find an avgun in anyone, he would find it 
in  himself,  but  in  no  way  would  he  perceive  an avgun in  the sant.  
Therefore,  a  person  who  has  realised  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn and 
His sant has  a  firm  foundation  in satsang.    Conversely,  a  person 
cannot   be   certain   about   someone   who   has   not   realised   such 
greatness.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Loyã || 17 || 125 || 
 
 
Loyã – 18 
Nishchay In Bhagvãn 
 
18.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on  the  night  of Posh  sud 1  [5
th
 January, 
1821], Swãmi Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a decorated 
bedstead in Surã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Loyã.  He was wearing a white 
khes and  a  warm,  red dagli.    In  addition  to  this,  He  had  covered 
Himself with a chofãl and a rajãi.  He had tied a white feto around His 
head,  and  had  tied  a bokãni with  another  white feto.    A sabhã of 
paramhans, as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered 
before Him. 
 
18.2
 Then, after the paramhans had finished the sandhyã ãrti and prayers, 
Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Please sing a kirtan.”  Then, Muktãnand Swãmi 
and   some   other paramhans sang kirtans while   playing   musical 
instruments. 
 
18.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Please  conclude  the  singing  as  I  wish  to 
talk.  If any doubts arise in what I say, please ask.” 
 
18.4
 So  saying,  He  began,  “To  develop nishchay in Bhagvãn is   more 
difficult   than   anything   else.      Also,   as   this   topic   of nishchay is 

LOYÃ 
- 381 - 
extremely   complex,   I   am   afraid   of   discussing   it.      I   feel, ‘Upon 
discussing  this  topic,  what  if  someone  was  to  misunderstand  it?    What 
if,  due  to  this  discussion,  any  characteristic  that  a  person  may  have 
firmly developed were to be destroyed or uprooted?’  However, there is 
no alternative but to reveal this fact.  If a person does not interpret it 
correctly,  many  problems  can  arise.    But,  until  a  person  has  not 
understood    this    fact,    a    great    deficiency    will    remain    in    his 
understanding.  That is why I wish to deliver this talk. 
 
18.5
 “When Bhagvãn assumed  the svarup of Varãh,  His svarup as  a  boar 
was  very  ugly.    During  the avatãr of Matsya,  His svarup was  exactly 
like  that  of  a  fish.    During  the Kurma avatãr,  His svarup was  exactly 
like  that  of  other  turtles.    In  the Nrusinh avatãr,  His svarup was  as 
frightening as a lion.  During the Vãman avatãr, His svarup was like a 
dwarf,  with  short  hands  and  legs,  a  board  waist  and  a  plump  body.  
During the Vyãs avatãr, He appeared black, with lots of body hair and 
a foul body odour. 
 
18.6
 “All those who attained Bhagvãn in  whichever svarup He  had  taken, 
performed dhyãn on  that  particular svarup.    As  a  result  of  that 
meditation, they attained a svarup similar to that svarup of Bhagvãn.  
Now,  did  those  who  attained Varãh,  see Bhagvãn exactly like  a  boar 
in  His dhãm?    Did  those  who  attained Matsya,  see Bhagvãn exactly 
like a fish in His dhãm?  Did those who attained Kurma, see Bhagvãn 
exactly like a turtle in His dhãm?  Did those who attained Nrusinh see 
Bhagvãn exactly  like  a  lion  in  His dhãm?  Did  those  who  attained 
Hayagriv see Bhagvãn exactly as a horse in His dhãm?  Did those who 
worshipped Varãh as  if  He  were  their  husband  become  a  female 
boar?    Did  those  who  worshipped  Him  with  the  love  of  a  friend 
become  a  boar?    Did  those  who  worshipped Matsya as  if  He  were 
their husband become a female fish?  Did those who worshipped Him 
with  the  love  of  a  friend  become  a  fish?    Did  those  who  worshipped 
Kurma as  if  He  were  their  husband  become  a  female  turtle?    Did 
those who worshipped Him with the love of a friend become a turtle?  
Did  those  who  worshipped Nrusinh as  if  He  were  their  husband 

LOYÃ 
- 382 - 
become a lioness?  Did those who worshipped Him with the love of a 
friend  become  a  lion?    Did  those  who  worshipped Hayagriv as  if  He 
were   their   husband   become   a   female   horse?      Did   those   who 
worshipped  Him  with  the  love  of  a  friend  become  a  horse?    If  the 
original svarup of Bhagvãn was exactly like that of the avatãr, then by 
meditating  on  them,  the bhaktas of  each avatãr should  attain  that 
same svarup,  and  all  that  I have  just  mentioned  should  happen.  
However, this is not the case. 
 
18.7
 “Then, you may ask, ‘What is the svarup of that Bhagvãn like?’  Well, 
the answer is that Bhagvãn is sachidãnand, and possesses a murti full 
of  divine  light.    In  every  single  pore  of His  body,  there  is  light 
equivalent  to  millions and  millions  of  suns.    Moreover,  that Bhagvãn 
is so handsome that He puts even millions of Kãm-Devs to shame.  He 
is  the  lord  of  countless  millions  of brahmãnds,  the  king  of  kings,  the 
controller  of  all,  the antaryãmi of  all,  and  extremely  blissful.    In 
comparison  to  His  bliss,  the  pleasure  of  seeing  countless  beautiful 
women fades into insignificance.  In fact, before the bliss of the murti 
of the Bhagvãn, the pleasures of the vishays of this lok and the higher 
loks fade  into  insignificance.    Such  is  the svarup of Bhagvãn.    That 
svarup always has two arms, but by His wish, He may appear to have 
four  arms,  or  sometimes  may  appear  to  have  eight  arms,  or  He  may 
even be seen as having a thousand arms. 
 
18.8
 “Furthermore,  it  is  that  very Bhagvãn who  assumes  the svarup such 
as Matsya, Kurma, Varãh, and the svarup of Rãm and Krishna, for the 
purpose  of  fulfilling  some  task.    However,  he  does  not  abandon  His 
original svarup to assume the svarup of these avatãrs.  That Bhagvãn 
Himself  assumes  the svarups like Matsya and Kurma,  possessing 
countless  divine  powers and  great  strength.    Then,  once  the  task  for 
which He assumed a body is completed, He abandons that body.  For 
this reason, it is said in the Shreemad Bhãgvat: 
 
bhu-bhãraha kshapito yena tãm tanum vijahãvajah 
kantakam kantakeneva dvayam chãpeeshituhu samama 
 

LOYÃ 
- 383 - 
“This shlok explains  that  through  whichever  physical  body Bhagvãn 
relieved the burden of the earth, after removing the ‘thorn’ (the belief 
that  a  person  is  the body)  which  has  pierced  the chaitanya of  the 
beings, Bhagvãn also  abandoned  His  own  physical  body,  which  was 
the ‘thorn’ used to remove the other ‘thorn’. 
 
18.9
 “Also, Bhagvãn assumed  the svarup of Nrusinh for  the  purpose  of 
killing  a  demon.    After  completing  that  task,  He  decided  to  abandon 
that particular body.  But, who could kill a lion?  So, by Bhagvãn’s own 
will, Shiv (in the form of Kãl), came assuming the svarup of a sharabh.  
Nrusinh then fought the sharabh.  As a result, both left their physical 
bodies.      That   is   how Shiv came   to   be   known   as   Sharbheshvar 
Mahãdev,  and  the  location  where Nrusinhji left  his  body  became 
Nãrsinhi Shilã. 
 
18.10
 “Moreover, wherever paintings of Matsya, Kurma,  and  other avatãrs 
of Bhagvãn are portrayed, the lower portions of the paintings depict 
the svarup as  the  avatãr,  like  a  fish  or  a  turtle.    However,  the  upper 
portions of the paintings depict the murti of Bhagvãn with a shankh, a 
chakra, a gadã, a padma, a vaijayanti garland, silk garments, a crown, 
and  the shrivatsa mark,  as  well  as  other  symbols.    Therefore,  the 
murti of Bhagvãn is eternally like this. 
 
18.11
 “Initially,  at  the  time  of  His  birth, Shree   Krishna Bhagvãn gave 
darshan in  a  four-armed svarup to  Vasudev  and  Devki.    He also  gave 
darshan to  Akrur  in  water  in  a  four-armed svarup.    When  Rukmani 
fainted, He again gave darshan in a four-armed svarup.  Arjun has also 
said: 
 
tenaiva rupena chatur-bhujen sahasra-bãho bhava vishvamurte 
O one whose form is the svarup!  O thousand-armed!  
Please return to your original four-armed svarup! 
 
“So, Arjun also saw Him as having a four-armed svarup.  When Shree 
Krishna Bhagvãn was  seated  under  a  pipal  tree  after  the  Yadavs  had 

LOYÃ 
- 384 - 
slaughtered themselves, Uddhavji and Maitreya Rushi saw the svarup 
of Bhagvãn having four-arms, along with a shankh, a chakra, a gadã, a 
padma,  and  silk  garments.    Moreover, Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn was 
dark  in  complexion,  yet  His  beauty  is  described  as  being  capable  of 
putting millions of Kãm-Devs to shame. 
 
18.12
 “Therefore,  although Bhagvãn appears   to   be   like   a   human,   the 
previously  mentioned  luminosity  and  bliss  are  all  inherent  within 
Him.  A person who has the strengths of dhyãn, dhãrnã, and samãdhi, 
sees  that  very svarup of  having  the  light  of  millions  and  millions  of 
suns; such a person does not need to resort to using a torch or an oil 
lamp.    Moreover,  even  though Bhagvãn is  so  luminous,  the  fact  that 
this divine light cannot be seen is due to Bhagvãn’s wish.  If Bhagvãn 
wished, ‘May the bhaktas see me full of divine light’,  then  that  same 
svarup would be seen as luminous.  So, a person who has the nishchay 
in Bhagvãn realises, ‘The divya powers, riches, and pãrshads of the 
dhãms  of  Golok,  Vaikunth,  Shvet-Dvip,  and  Brahmpur,  all  accompany 
Bhagvãn.    Also,  the  bhaktas  who  serve  Him  include  Rãdhikã  and 
Lakshmi’.  He  sees Bhagvãn in  such  a  glorious  way.    However,  those 
who  are  fools  see  Him  as  a  human.   Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn has  also 
mentioned in the Geetã: 
 
avajãnanti mãm moodhã mãnusheem tanum-ãshritam 
param bhãvam-ajãnanto mama bhoota-maheshvaram 
Fools describe me as having a human svarup, but they do not realise my 
magnificent svarup as the great lord of all beings. 
 
“Therefore, those who are fools fail to realise such greatness of 
Bhagvãn; instead, they perceive human traits in Bhagvãn, seeing Him 
as a human like themselves. 
 
18.13
  “What is meant by perceiving human characteristics?  Well, it is when 
all  the  feelings of  the antah-karans,  like kãm, krodh, lobh, moh, mad, 
matsar, ãshã, trushnã; and all the characteristics of the physical body, 
like  bones,  skin,  faeces,  and  urine;  as  well  as  birth,  childhood,  youth, 
old age, and death; and all other human characteristics may appear to 

LOYÃ 
- 385 - 
have a nishchay in Bhagvãn, but his nishchay is flawed.  As a result, he 
will surely fall from satsang. 
 
18.14
 “That Bhagvãn’s svarup is  supremely divya – there  is  not  even  the 
slightest  trace  of  human  characteristics  in Bhagvãn,  and  a  person 
should  instead  not  perceive  human  traits  in Bhagvãn,  and  he  should 
instead  initially  view  Him  as  a dev;  then  he  should  view  Him  as 
Brahmã;  then  as Pradhãn-Purush;  then  as Prakruti-Purush;  then  as 
Akshar;  and  finally  as Purushottam.    For  example,  upon  seeing  the 
incredible charitras of Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn,  the  cow-herds  of Vraj 
initially  viewed  Him  as  a dev.    Then,  after  listening  to  the  words  of 
Garg-Ãchãrya, they viewed Him as Bhagvãn.  Then, they said, ‘You are 
Bhagvãn.      So,   show  us  your  dhãm’.  They   were   then   shown 
Akshardhãm.  A person who believes Bhagvãn to be divya in this way 
should be known to have to complete nishchay. 
 
18.15
 “Sometimes people say, ‘Initially, this person did not have the nishchay 
in  Bhagvãn,  but  now  he does’.  Does  that  mean  that  he  did  not  see 
Bhagvãn initially?    Well,  he  certainly  did  see  Him,  but  he  perceived 
human  characteristics  in  Him.    Later,  after  he  develops nishchay,  he 
does darshan believing Bhagvãn to   be   completely divya;   that   is 
known  as  having  developed  the nishchay in Bhagvãn.    Moreover, if  a 
person  does  not  believe Bhagvãn to  be  completely divya,  then  he 
repeatedly  becomes  upset  and  constantly  perceives gun and avgun.  
He thinks, ‘Bhagvãn is favouring that person, but not me’, or ‘He often 
calls that person, but not me’, or ‘He has more love for that person, and 
less for me’.  In this way, he continues perceiving gun and avgun.  As a 
result,  his  heart  becomes  more  and  more  miserable  day  by  day,  and 
ultimately he falls from satsang.  Therefore, a person should certainly 
not perceive human characteristics in Bhagvãn. 
 
18.16
 “A person should not perceive avgun even in the bhaktas of Bhagvãn.  
This is  because  physically  a bhakta may  be  blind, disabled,  deaf, old, 
unattractive, or he may have leukoderma; but when he dies, does he 
still remain blind or disabled in the dhãm of Bhagvãn?  Certainly not.  

LOYÃ 
- 386 - 
Those are all features of humans.  After leaving these features behind, 
he  assumes  a divya svarup and  becomes brahm-rup.    Therefore,  if  a 
person  should  not  perceive avgun in  the bhaktas of Bhagvãn,  then 
how can he possibly perceive them in Bhagvãn? 
 
18.17
 “Regardless  of  whether  you  understand  this  fact  today  or  you 
understand it after a hundred years, it must be understood.  In actual 
fact,  there  is  no  alternative  but  to  understand  it  and  remember  it 
firmly.    Therefore,  all bhaktas should  remember  this  principle  of 
mine  and  discuss  it  amongst  each  other.    Furthermore,  whenever 
someone suffers a setback due to some misunderstanding, he should 
be alerted by mentioning this.  A person should discuss this principle 
of mine regularly, at least once a day – this is my ãgnã.  So, please do 
not forget it; please, please, do not forget it!” 
 
18.18
 Saying  this,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  bid  “Jay  Swãminarayan”  to  all  the 
bhaktas and  returned  to  His  residence  smiling.    After  listening  to 
Shreeji Mahãrãj’s talk, all the sãdhus  and bhaktas realised  Shreeji 
Mahãrãj   is   the   cause   of   all avatãrs,   the ‘avatãri’,   and   greatly 
strengthened their nishchay in Him as being completely divya. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Loyã || 18 || 126 || 
 
 
|| End of Shree Loyã Prakaran ||

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 387 - 
|| SHREE SWÃMINÃRAYAN VIJAYTETRÃM || 
 
VACHANÃMRUT 
Shree Panchãlã Prakaran 
 
Panchãlã – 1 
The Happiness Of Akshardhãm 
 
1.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Fãgan  sud 4  [3
rd
 March  1821],  Shreeji 
Mahãrãj was sitting on a decorated bedstead that had been placed on 
a  platform  in  Jhinã-Bhãi’s darbãr in  Panchãlã.    He  was  wearing  a 
white angarkhu and a white khes.  He had tied a white feto around His 
head,  with  its  end  hanging  on  the  right  side.    He  had  also  covered 
Himself with a thin, white pachhedi.  A sabhã of paramhans, as well as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
1.2
 Then,   after   the sandhyã ãrti,   Shreeji   Mahãrãj sat   on   a   large, 
cylindrical pillow and said, “I wish to ask a question to all these 
senior paramhans and  senior bhaktas:    A  person  may  have  love  for 
Bhagvãn,  and  also  the  determination  to  follow dharma.    However,  if 
he  has  not  applied  a  thought  process,  then  the  extremely  attractive 
vishays (shabda, sparsh, rup, ras, and gandh) will never be considered 
equivalent   to   the   extremely   repulsive vishays;   nor   will   they   be 
considered  inferior  to  them.    So,  which  thought  must  be  applied  so 
that the extremely attractive vishays seem equivalent to or inferior to 
the  extremely  repulsive vishays?   I  ask  this  question  to  all  the senior 
bhaktas.    Whoever  has,  through  whichever  thought,  realised  the 
attractive vishays to be like the repulsive vishays, or has realised them 
to  be  far  more  repulsive  than  even  the  repulsive vishays,  please 
reveal your thoughts.” 
 
1.3
 Then, all the paramhans and all the bhaktas disclosed their thoughts. 
 
1.4
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Having heard your thoughts, I shall now 
tell  you  about  the  thought  which  I  have  maintained.    Consider  the 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 388 - 
following example:  If someone sends a letter from a distant land, the 
intelligence of the writer of that letter can be revealed by reading the 
letter.    Now,  the  appearance  and  style  of  speech  of  the  five  Pãndavs, 
Draupadi,   Kuntãji,   Rukmani,   Satyabhãmã,   Jambavati,   and   other 
queens of Bhagvãn, of Bhagvãn’s son, Sãmb, and of other bhaktas, are 
written in the shãstras.  By hearing those shãstras, the description of 
their  appearance  allows  us  to  visualise  them  as  if  having  direct 
darshan.    Also,  their  intelligence  can  be  revealed  from  the  words  of 
the shãstras.    In  the  same  way,  a  person  hears  from  the  Purãns,  the 
Mahãbhãrat,  and  other shãstras that Bhagvãn is  the  all-doer – is 
responsible  for  the  creation,  sustenance,  and  destruction  of  this 
universe – and  that  He  eternally  has  a svarup.    If  He  did  not  have  a 
svarup,  He  could  not  be called  the  all-doer.    Furthermore, Akshar-
Brahm is the dhãm in which Bhagvãn resides.  It is that Bhagvãn who 
has a divya murti; who is luminous and blissful; and who, at the time 
of creation, gives a buddhi, indriyas, a man, and prãns to the jeevs that 
had been merged in Mãyã along with their kãran bodies at the time of 
destruction.    Why  does  He  give  these  to  the jeevs?    He  does  so  to 
enable them to indulge in the uttam, madhyam, and kanishth types of 
vishays as well as for the purpose of attaining moksh. 
 
1.5
 “Bhagvãn has  created  enjoyments  and  places  of  enjoyment  for  the 
sake of those jeevs; but within that, the creation of the uttam vishays 
are  for  the  purpose  of  reducing  the  miseries  of  the  inferior vishays.  
For  example,  a  wealthy  merchant  may have  had  trees  planted  on 
both sides of a road to provide shade; he may have had water-houses 
constructed;  he  may  have  also  had  charity-houses  and  guest-homes 
constructed.    He  does  all  of  this  for  the  poor.    Similarly,  before 
Bhagvãn, Brahmã, Shiv, Indra, and  other devs are  as  poor  as  those 
paupers of Samvat 1847 who boiled the fruits of pipal trees and then 
ate  them.    It  is Bhagvãn who has  created  those uttam vishays for  the 
happiness of Brahmã and the other devs, and for humans.  Also, since 
the  rich  merchant  builds  facilities  for  the  sake  of  the  poor,  it  is 
obvious that compared to those, the luxuries in the merchant’s own 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 389 - 
home must be far greater.  Similarly, Bhagvãn has created happiness 
for Brahmã and  others;  so  it  is  obvious  to  an  intelligent  person that 
compared  to  those,  the  bliss  of  His  own dhãm must  be  far  more 
superior.    An  intelligent  person  can  then  conclude  that  there  is  an 
extreme  amount  of  bliss  in  the dhãm of Bhagvãn.    As  a  result,  the 
attractive vishays become repulsive for him. 
 
1.6
 “Furthermore, all  the  happiness  related  to vishays which is apparent 
in this world, be it for animals, humans, devs, or ghosts, is only due to 
some relation with Bhagvãn, and when the happiness is coupled with 
dharma.    However,  the  bliss  that  is  in Bhagvãn Himself  cannot  be 
found  anywhere  else.    Consider  the  following  example:    The  light 
from  this  burning  torch  which  falls  a  short  distance  away  is  not  as 
intense as the light in the vicinity of the torch.  Very far away, there is 
not light at all.  In the same way, elsewhere there is only a little bliss, 
but  absolute  bliss  is  only  available  in  the  vicinity  of Bhagvãn.    The 
further   a   person   is   distanced   from Bhagvãn,   the   less   bliss   he 
experiences.    Therefore,  a  person  who  is  a mumukshu realises, ‘The 
further  away  I am  from  Bhagvãn,  the  more  miseries  I  will  face,  and 
ultimately I will become extremely miserable.  On the other hand, even 
the  slightest  association  with  Bhagvãn  will  provide  immense  bliss.    I 
shall experience the highest form of bliss’.  A person who thinks in this 
way, keeps a desire for the bliss of Bhagvãn, and employs any means 
to   maintain   very   close   association   with Bhagvãn,   can   be   called 
intelligent. 
 
1.7
 “Moreover,  the  happiness  of  humans  exceeds  the  happiness  of 
animals; and the happiness of a king exceeds that; and the happiness 
of Indra exceeds  that;  then Bruhaspati’s happiness,  then Brahmã’s, 
then Vaikunth’s.  Beyond that, the happiness of Golok is superior, and 
finally, the bliss of Bhagvãn’s Akshardhãm is far more superior. 
 
1.8
 “In this way, realising  the  intensity  of  the  bliss  of Bhagvãn,  a  person 
who is intelligent realises all other pleasures related to vishays to be 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 390 - 
insignificant.    Compared  to  the  bliss  of Bhagvãn,  the  pleasures  of 
others  are  like  that  of  a  poor  man  who  begs  with  a  clay  pot  at  the 
door of a rich grahastha.  When I think of the bliss of the dhãm of that 
Bhagvãn, I become uninterested in all other forms of happiness, and I 
feel, ‘When will I leave this body to experience that bliss?’  Moreover, 
when  I  naturally  indulge  in  the panch-vishays,  I  think  about  no 
particular thought; but, if I were to sense some pleasure in an object, 
my thoughts would immediately be diverted to the bliss of Bhagvãn, 
and my mind would become extremely uninterested. 
 
1.9
 “These  thoughts  can  only  be  fully   realised   by  a   person   who   is 
intelligent.    In  fact,  I  have  love  towards  a  person  who  is  intelligent.  
This  is  because  I  myself  am  intelligent,  as  is  my  thought  process.  
Moreover, a person who is intelligent will also think similarly.  In this 
way,  it  appears  to  me  that  my  thought  is  superior  to  all  of  your 
thoughts;  therefore,  all  of  you  should  firmly  remember  this  thought 
of mine in your hearts.  Without applying this thought, if a person’s 
vrutti does  become  attached  to  appealing vishays,  it  will  only just 
become detached – and only after much effort.  However, for a person 
who   has   applied   this   thought,   very   little   effort   is   involved   in 
withdrawing  his vrutti;  he  can  easily  realise  how  worthless  the 
vishays are. 
 
1.10
 “This fact can only be understood by  a  person  who  has  a  sharp 
intelligence,  and  a  craving  for  higher  happiness.    For  example,  a 
penny  is  worth  more  than  a  cowry-shell,  and  a  rupee  is  worth  more 
than  a  penny;  a  gold  coin  is  more  valuable  than  a  rupee,  and  a 
chintãmani is  more  valuable  than a  gold  coin.    Similarly,  wherever 
there  are  pleasures  of  the panch-vishays,  the  bliss  of Bhagvãn in  His 
dhãm is  far  more  superior  in  comparison.    Therefore,  this  thought 
only settles in the heart of a person who is intelligent and who thinks 
in this way.  When this thought does firmly settle in the heart, even if 
he  happens  to  be  in  a  forest,  he  would  feel, ‘I am surrounded by 
countless people and the wealth of the kingdom’,  and  he  would  not 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 391 - 
believe himself to be miserable.  Conversely, if he were in Indra’s lok, 
he  would feel, ‘I am sitting in a forest’,  and  he  would  not  be  gratified 
by  the  pleasures  in  the lok of Indra.    In  fact,  he  would  realise  those 
pleasures to be worthless. 
 
1.11
 “Therefore, keeping this thought in mind, all of you should decide, 
‘Now we  want  to  reach  only  the  dhãm  of  Bhagvãn;  we  do  not  want  to 
be  tempted  by  the  worthless  pleasures  of  the  panch-vishays  along  the 
way’.  So, please keep this determination in your mind, as what I have 
told all of you is my principle; please embed it firmly in your lives.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Panchãlã || 1|| 127 || 
 
 
Panchãlã – 2 
Sãnkhya And Yog 
 
2.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Fãgan  sud 7  [10
th
 March, 1821],  Shreeji 
Mahãrãj was sitting on a decorated bedstead that had been placed on 
a  platform  in  Jhinã-Bhãi’s darbãr in  Panchãlã.    He  was  wearing  a 
white khes and  had  covered  Himself  with  a  white pachhedi.    He  had 
also tied a white feto around His head.  A sabhã of paramhans, as well 
as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
2.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Please bring the Moksh-Dharma shãstras 
so that we can arrange for a kathã on the chapter of Sãnkhya and the 
chapter of Yog.”  Then,  the shãstras were  brought  to  the sabhã,  and 
Nityãnand Swãmi commenced the reading. 
 
2.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “The followers of Yog consider jeev and 
ishvar to be the twenty-fifth tattva, and Paramãtmã to be the twenty-
sixth tattva.  On the other hand, followers of Sãnkhya include jeev and 
ishvar with  the  twenty-four tattvas,  and  consider Paramãtmã to  be 
the  twenty-fifth tattva.    Of  the  two,  the  followers  of  Yog  believe  that 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 392 - 
regardless  of  however  much  a  person  thinks  of  the ãtmã and  non-
ãtmã, or however much effort he makes, without accepting the refuge 
of pratyaksha  Bhagvãn,  he  cannot  attain moksh.    On  the  other  hand, 
followers   of Sãnkhya believe   that   if   a   person   understands   the 
ultimate  fate  of  all devs and  humans,  develops vairãgya for  the 
vishays, and realises his ãtmã as greater than the three bodies (sthul, 
sukshma, kãran),  then  he  becomes  a mukta.    However,  since  each  of 
these two types of beliefs has their own deficiencies, a person should 
employ   certain   methods   of   understanding   for   the purpose   of 
resolving those deficiencies. 
 
2.4
 “The flaw of the Yog philosophy is that both the jeev and ishvar have 
been considered as the twenty-fifth tattva and both have been said to 
have  bodies  comprised  of  twenty-four tattvas.    As  a  result,  both  the 
jeev and ishvar seem equal.  This would suggest that the sthul body is 
the same as virãt, the sukshma body is the same as sutrãtmã, and the 
kãran body  is  the  same  as avyãkrut.    It  also  suggests  that  the jãgrat 
state is the same as that of sustenance, the svapna state is the same as 
that   of   creation,   and   the sushupti state   is   the   same   as   that   of 
destruction.        Moreover, vishva, taijas,    and prãgna,    would    be 
considered  equal  to Vishnu, Brahmã,  and Shiv respectively.    As  a 
result,  those  followers  would  worship  the  twenty-sixth tattva with 
such understanding. 
 
2.5
 “To remove this deficiency of equating jeev and ishvar,  a  person 
should  learn  the  following  method  of  interpretation  from  a  wise 
person:    The  five bhuts residing  in  the  body  of ishvar are  known  as 
mahã-bhuts,  and  those bhuts sustain  the  bodies  of  all jeevs.    On  the 
other  hand,  the  five bhuts in  the  body  of  the jeev are  minor  and  are 
incapable   of  sustaining  others.      Also,   the jeev possesses   limited 
knowledge compared to ishvar, who is all-knowing.  A person should 
learn  such  a  method  of  interpretation so  that  the jeev and ishvar are 
not  understood  to  be  equal  to  each  other.    If  a  person  has  not  done 
that  and  some  opponent  were  to  ask  a  question  in  a  debate,  then  he 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 393 - 
would  find  it  difficult  to  reply.    As  a  result,  his  own  understanding 
would  become  confused.    But,  if  he  has  learnt  such  a  method,  then 
even if someone were to raise a question, he would not allow the jeev 
and ishvar to  be  considered  as  being  equal.    Also,  he  should  only 
listen to words that strengthen this belief. 
 
2.6
 “Next, the flaw of the followers of the Sãnkhya philosophy is that they 
consider Paramãtmã to  be  the  twenty-fifth tattva,  who  is  greater 
than  the  twenty-four tattvas.    They  consider  the  twenty-four tattvas 
as  being  false  and Paramãtmã as  being satya.    If  that  were  so,  who 
would attain that Paramãtmã?  After all, the jeev, who is the achiever, 
is not considered distinct from the tattvas.   
 
2.7
 “To  remove  that  deficiency,  a  person  should  learn  the  following 
method  of  interpretation  from  a  wise  person:   Jeev and ishvar have 
been  included  with  the tattvas because  those  twenty-four tattvas 
cannot  exist  without  the jeev and ishvar.    But,  in  reality, jeev and 
ishvar are  distinct  from  those tattvas, and  do  attain Paramãtmã.    A 
person  should  learn  such  a  method  of  interpretation.    If  he  has  not 
done so, and an opponent in a debate were to ask a question, doubts 
would  arise,  and  he  would  think, ‘If the tattvas are truly  false,  then 
what  is  the  purpose  of  prescribing  the  observance  of  dharma,  such  as 
brahm-chãrya,  and  spiritual  activities  such  as  shravan,  manan,  and 
nididhyãs, to attain Paramãtmã?’  Therefore, jeev and ishvar have 
been  included  with  the tattvas because  they  have  attained  oneness 
with the tattvas; however, they are totally distinct from those tattvas 
and  do  attain Paramãtmã.    In  this  way,  followers  of  the  Sãnkhya 
philosophy  should  learn such methods  of  interpretation  from  a  wise 
sãdhu. 
 
2.8
 “Moreover, the  followers  of  Yog  propose  the  following  methods: 
Moksh is  attained  by  performing dhyãn on  the pratyaksha murtis  of 
the avatãrs of Bhagvãn such   as Matsya, Kurma, Varãh, Nrusinh, 
Vãman, Rãm, and Krishna.  However, the followers of Sãnkhya accept 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 394 - 
methods  which  claim  that moksh is  attained  when  a  person  fully 
realises  the svarup of Bhagvãn,  through  experience,  as  described  by 
the various Shruti shãstras: 
 
yato vãcho nivartante aprãpya manasã saha 
From where speech returns along with the mind without having attained 
Bhagvãn. 
 
 “Both philosophies are good and have been accepted by the great, 
and  a  person  who  follows  both  of  them  appropriately  does  attain 
Akshardhãm.      In   both   of   these   philosophies,   the   same   spiritual 
activities have been prescribed, but the method of worship in each is 
not the same; in fact, it is extremely different.” 
 
2.9
 Having spoken in this way, Shreeji Mahãrãj then told the paramhans, 
“Now please sing kirtans.” 
 
2.10
 Then,  Muktãnand  Swãmi  and  some  other paramhans began  singing 
kirtans to the accompaniment of musical instruments.  Following this, 
Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Now, please stop the kirtans.    While  you  were 
singing,  I  thought  over  the  philosophies  of  both  Sãnkhya  and  Yog.  
Please listen as I explain. 
 
2.11
 “For a person who follows Yog, the luminous, divya  svarup  murti of 
Bhagvãn which resides in Akshardhãm at the time of ãtyantik-pralay 
is worthy of performing dhyãn upon.  Moreover, Bhagvãn in the form 
of Prakruti-Purush is also worthy of performing dhyãn upon, but to a 
lesser extent.  To a lesser extent than that, Bhagvãn in the form of the 
twenty-four tattvas, which have evolved from Prakruti-Purush, is also 
worthy  of  performing dhyãn upon.    To  a  lesser  extent  than  that, 
Hiranyagarbh;  and  to  a  lesser  extent  than  that, Virãt – who  has 
evolved  from  the  twenty-four tattvas – is  also  worthy  of  performing 
dhyãn upon.    Still  to  a  lesser  extent  than  that, Brahmã, Vishnu,  and 
Shiv, as well as the avatãrs of Bhagvãn on this earth, such as Matsya, 
Kurma, Nrusinh,  and Varãh,  as  well  as shãligrãm and  other murtis  of 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 395 - 
Bhagvãn – are  all  worthy  of  performing dhyãn upon.    While  I  was 
thinking, I realised that this is the essence of the philosophy of Yog. 
 
2.12
 “Then, I thought over the Sãnkhya philosophy.  They have done away 
with all  those svarups,  and  it appears  that  they  believe, ‘The cause of 
all thoughts is the jeev, and since there is nothing as pure as the jeev, it 
is appropriate to perform dhyãn upon the jeev’.    In  order  to  disprove 
this    view    of    Sãnkhya,    I    again thought    of   Yog.        Specifically, 
Purushottam Bhagvãn,  who  is  greater  than  everything,  has  an anvay 
relationship   with Prakruti and Purush and   all   other   entities.  
Therefore,  they  are  all Bhagvãn;  all  possess  a divya svarup;  all  are 
satya and  worthy  of  performing dhyãn upon.    Certain  Vedic shloks 
also support this fact:   
 
sarvam khalvidam brahma 
The whole universe is brahm, the svarup of Bhagvãn. 
 
neha nãnãsti kinchana 
There is nothing in this universe that is not the svarup of Bhagvãn. 
 
idam hi vishvam bhagavãn-ivetaro yato jagat-sthãna-nirodha-sambhavãha 
This universe is as another svarup of Bhagvãn – who is the cause of the 
creation, sustenance, and destruction of the world. 
 
2.13
 “Therefore, a mumukshu who  follows  the  path  of  Yog  encounters  no 
obstacles.      This   is   because   that   path   is   easy   and   relies   on   the 
pratyaksha murti of Bhagvãn.    For  this  reason,  through  that  path, 
even an ordinary person can attain kalyãn without any difficulty. 
 
2.14
 “However, there is one flaw on that path:  Entities, such as Prakruti 
and Purush,  are  thought  of  as  being  the  components  of Purushottam 
Bhagvãn.    This  could  cause  the  following  belief  to  develop: Prakruti 
and Purush are  components  of Bhagvãn,  and  their  components  are 
Hiranyagarbh and Virãt.  If such an understanding develops, then that 
is  a  major  flaw  since  a  person  feels Bhagvãn is  divisible  and  has 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 396 - 
components.    However, Bhagvãn is  indivisible,  without  components, 
unchanging,     imperishable,     and     whole.          Therefore,     such     a 
misunderstanding should not be allowed to arise. 
 
2.15
 “Also, a person should understand, ‘Bhagvãn is one and unparalleled, 
while others, such as Prakruti and Purush, are His bhaktas and perform 
dhyãn  upon  Him.    That  is  why  they  are  referred  to  as  svarups  of 
Bhagvãn.  Just as a great sãdhu who performs dhyãn upon Bhagvãn is 
known  as  a  svarup  of  Bhagvãn,  in  the  same  way  Prakruti  and  Purush 
are  also  svarups  of  Bhagvãn.    Moreover,  Purushottam  Shree  Krishna, 
who is greater than everything, Himself assumes the forms of Vãsudev, 
Sankarshan, Pradyumna, and Aniruddha, and assumes avatãrs such as 
Ram and Krishna.  Therefore, He is worthy of performing dhyãn upon’.  
If  a  person  has  such  an  understanding,  then  that  path  of  Yog  is 
absolutely free of obstacles and is the best path. 
 
2.16
 “Now, the flaw of the Sãnkhya philosophy is that it claims, ‘All that is 
grasped via the antah-karans and the indriyas is false, while all that is 
grasped through experience is satya’.    Therefore,  they  propose  all 
svarups as being false.  Along with that, they also consider the svarups 
of Bhagvãn that have  incarnated  for  the kalyãn of the jeevs,  as  being 
false.    In  fact,  they  also  view  the svarups of Aniruddha, Pradyumna, 
and Sankarshan as  being  false.    They  only  accept Vãsudev,  who  is 
nirgun.  That is their major flaw. 
 
2.17
 “Therefore,  it  suits  the  followers  of  Sãnkhya  to  believe, ‘After 
absorbing  the  thoughts  of  Sãnkhya  and  considering  whatever  has 
evolved from Prakruti and Purush as being perishable, a person should 
realise  his  own  ãtmã  as  being  distinct  from  all,  as  being  pure,  and 
brahm-rup.    Then,  understanding  the  svarup  of  Bhagvãn  that  has 
incarnated for the kalyãn of the jeevs as being satya, he should perform 
dhyãn upon Him’.    In  this  way,  these  two  types  of  thoughts  can  be 
known  if  a  person  learns  from  someone  who  is  wise,  like  myself; 
otherwise,  even  if  a  person  studies  or  listens  to  the shãstras,  he 
cannot understand them. 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 397 - 
2.18
 “In reality, the teachings of Yog are actually for a person who has 
become brahm-rup by initially having practiced thoughts of Sãnkhya.  
Therefore, it is said: 
 
brahma-bhutaha prasannãtmã na shochati na kãnkshati 
samaha sarveshu bhuteshu mad-bhaktim labhate parãm 
A person who has become brahm-rup remains joyful, grieves nothing, desires 
nothing, behaves equally with all beings, and attains my supreme bhakti. 
 
ãtmãrãmash-cha munayo nirgranthã apyurukrame 
kurvantya-haitukeem bhakti-mittham-bhuta-guno hariha 
Despite being engaged only in the ãtmã, and despite having overcome all 
improper natures – the munis still offer selfless bhakti to Bhagvãn, as Bhagvãn 
possesses such divya qualities. 
 
parinishthitopi nairgunya uttam-shloka-leelayã 
gruheeta-chetã rãjarshe ãkhyanam yad-adheetavãn 
O King (Parikshit)!  Despite being perfectly poised in the nirgun state, having 
been attracted by the leelãs of Bhagvãn, I (Shukdevji) studied the Shreemad 
Bhãgvat. 
 
2.19
 “In this way, the Sãnkhya philosophy is dependent on Yog.  This is 
because  through  that  Sãnkhya  philosophy,  the  followers  of  Sãnkhya 
realise all vishays that can be indulged in via the five indriyas and four 
antah-karans – which are distinct from a person’s own ãtmã – to  be 
totally  worthless.    Therefore,  such  a  person  is  not  tempted  by  any 
objects, nor does he become attached to them.  Moreover, if someone 
were  to  say  to  him, ‘This object is extremely pleasurable’,  he  would 
think, ‘It may be pleasurable, but it is perceived through the indriyas 
and  antah-karans;  and  that  which  the  indriyas  and  antah-karans 
perceive is asatya and perishable’.  This is the firm understanding of a 
follower of Sãnkhya, who also realises his own ãtmã as pure.  Such a 
person  should  perform dhyãn, upãsanã,  and  offer bhakti to Bhagvãn 
according to the path of Yog.  If he does not adopt this, that would be 
a major flaw in him. 
 
2.20
 “In this way, I have described the eternal philosophies of the Sãnkhya 
shãstras and the Yog shãstras having thoroughly thought about them.  

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 398 - 
However,  the  followers  of  Yog  and  Sãnkhya  have  corrupted  both 
paths.    Those  who  are  followers  of  Yog  try  to  establish  the  truth  of 
svarups,  and  in the  process  they  realise  all  people,  the svarups of 
Brahmã, Vishnu,  and Shiv,  as  well  as svarups of Rãm, Krishna,  and 
other avatãrs as  equal  to  each  other.    Followers  of  Sãnkhya  criticise 
all svarups, and in the process they also criticise places of pilgrimage, 
vrat, murtis, yam and niyam, forms of dharma such as brahm-chãrya, 
as  well  as Brahmã, Vishnu,  and Shiv,  and Rãm, Krishna,  and  other 
avatãrs.    Therefore,  both  the  followers  of  Sãnkhya and  the  followers 
of  Yog  have  deviated  from  the correct  path.    As  a result,  they  will  be 
sent to Narak.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Panchãlã || 2 || 128 || 
 
 
Panchãlã – 3 
Intelligence Is Instrumental In Attaining Kalyãn 
Love Is Mãyã 
 
3.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Fãgan  sud 8  [11
th
 March, 1821],  Shreeji 
Mahãrãj was sitting on a decorated bedstead in Jhinã-Bhãi’s darbãr in 
Panchãlã.    He  was  wearing  a  white khes and  had  covered  Himself 
with a white pachhedi.  He had also tied a white feto around His head.  
A sabhã of paramhans, as well as a sabhã of haribhaktas from various 
places, had gathered before Him. 
 
3.2
 Then,   Shreeji   Mahãrãj said   to   the paramhans,  “Please  begin  a 
question-answer discussion.” 
 
3.3
 Then,  Muni  Bãvã asked Brahmãnand Swãmi, “We have attained this 
satsang,  as  well  as  the  association  of Bhagvãn.    All  other  flaws  have 
been eradicated, and we also have enthusiasm to do satsang.  Despite 
this, why do mãn and irshyã still remain?” 
 
3.4
 Brahmãnand Swãmi then began to supply an answer, but was unable 
to do so satisfactorily. 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 399 - 
3.5
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Such a person lacks intelligence.  This is 
because a person who is intelligent realises all of his gun and avgun, 
as well as the gun and avgun of others.  On the other hand, a person 
who  is  not  intelligent  only  acknowledges  his  own gun,  but  fails  to 
realise  his avgun;  he  feels  himself  to  be  as  distinguished  as  the 
Sanakãdik,  and  he  views  other  renowned  people  to  be  inferior  to 
himself.  However, a person who is intelligent realises his own avgun, 
and  thinks ‘I possess many avgun.  Then,  maintaining  an  intense 
hatred  towards  those avgun,  he  eradicates  them.    Also,  if  a sãdhu 
were to speak to him about eradicating those avgun, he would accept 
that advice as beneficial.  As a result, avgun, such as mãn and irshyã, 
will not remain in him.  
 
3.6
 “On the other hand, someone may appear to be very intelligent, but if 
he  does  not  recognise his  own  flaws,  then  his  intelligence  should  be 
known to be merely worldly.  Outwardly, that intelligence appears to 
be very sharp, but he cannot be called intelligent.  Actually, he should 
be  known  to  be  an  utter  fool,  and  his  intelligence  is  useless  for 
attaining  his  own moksh.   In  comparison,  someone  else  may  possess 
only  a  little  intelligence,  but  if  he  attempts  to  eradicate  his avgun 
after recognising them, then even his limited intelligence is useful in 
attaining moksh.  In fact, only he can be called intelligent.  Therefore, 
a  person  who  never  perceives  his  own avgun and  perceives only  his 
own gun should be known as a fool; and a person who acknowledges 
his own avgun should be known to be intelligent.” 
 
3.7
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj instructed, “Now, please sing kirtans.”  The 
paramhans then  commenced  singing ‘Sakhi  Ãj  Mohan  Deethã  Re, 
Sheriye Ãvta Re...’.” 
 
3.8
 Following this, Shreeji Mahãrãj spoke again, “Now, please stop the 
singing.    The kirtans that  you  have  just  sung  are  full  of  love.    While 
you were singing, I thought about the nature of love, and realised that 
love   is   a   great   quality;   and   to   worship Bhagvãn with   love   is 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 400 - 
admirable.    After  deep  thought,  I  realised, ‘Love itself is the mãyã of 
Bhagvãn’.   This  is  because  if  two  women  are  casually  talking  to  each 
other,  looking  at  each  other,  or  casually  touching  each  other,  then 
that  is  a  different  type  of  love.    Or,  if  two  men  are  talking  to  each 
other,  looking  at  each  other,  or  casually  touching each  other,  then 
that is also a different type of love.  However, if a man is looking at a 
woman,   embracing   her,   listening   to   her   talks,  and   enjoying   her 
fragrance, then the love and mental attraction he develops for her is a 
type  of  love  that  does  not  develop  between  two  men.    Also,  if  a 
woman  is  looking  at  a  man  and  embracing  him,  then  the  love  she 
develops for him through his association, with her mind being totally 
attracted   towards  him,  is  a   type   of   love   that  does   not   develop 
between  two  women.    Therefore,  that  which  is  the  cause  of  the 
continuance  of  the  world,  and  the  cause  of  bondage  and  the  cycle  of 
births  and  deaths,  is  the mãyã of Bhagvãn,  which  takes  the  form  of 
love. 
 
3.9
 “Then, I thought, ‘Shabda, sparsh, rup, ras, and gandh are  the  panch-
vishays.    After  having  regarded  everything  else  as  perishable,  if  those 
vishays are directed only towards Bhagvãn, realising Him to be the only 
source of ultimate bliss, then that is fine – that is not mãyã’.  But, then I 
thought  that  even  that  is  not  appropriate.    After  all,  if  a  person 
perceives shabda,  sparsh,  rup,  ras,  and  gandh,  to  be  better  in  other 
objects  compared  to  those  that  are  in Bhagvãn,  he  will  abandon 
Bhagvãn and will develop love for other objects.  For example, Shree 
Krishna Bhagvãn’s 16,100 wives, who were apsãrãs in past lives, had 
asked  for  the  following vardãn from Brahmã:   ‘O Mahãrãj!  We have 
experienced  the  touch  of  devs,  demons,  and  humans,  but  we  have  not 
experienced  the  touch  of  Bhagvãn  as  our  husband.    Therefore,  please 
grace  us  so  that He becomes our  husband’.    So, Brahmã replied, 
‘Perform  tap  and  Bhagvãn  will  become  your  husband’.      So,   they 
performed intense tap, after which Ashtãvakra Rushi and Nãrad Muni 
both  became  pleased  and  granted  the  following vardãn:   ‘Bhagvãn 
will  become  your husband’.    In  this  way,  by  performing  many tap in 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 401 - 
other   lives,   they   attained Shree   Krishna Bhagvãn.      However,   on 
perceiving  more  beauty  in  Sãmb  than  in Bhagvãn,  they  became 
infatuated  by  Sãmb.    Therefore,  it  is  not  appropriate  for  a  person 
whose  mind  is  not  steady  to  develop  love  for Bhagvãn through  the 
pleasures  of  the vishays of  the  five indriyas.  However, if a person’s 
mind  does  remain  steady,  without  having  any  doubts,  then  it  is 
appropriate. 
 
3.10
 “Moreover,  a  person  who  is  intelligent  should  develop   love   for 
Bhagvãn in  the  following  way:    A  person  should  realise  his jeev as 
being distinct from the twenty-four tattvas.  Then, after uprooting the 
vruttis of  the  five indriyas that  are  firmly  embedded  in  the jeev,  and 
while remaining as the jeev alone (without vruttis of the indriyas) he 
should  remain nirgun and  develop  as  much  love  for Bhagvãn as 
possible. 
 
3.11
 “What do I mean by nirgun?  Well, the ten indriyas are the products of 
rajo-gun; the antah-karans and their presiding devs are the products 
of sattva-gun;   and   the   five bhuts and   the panch-vishays are   the 
products  of tamo-gun.    A  person  who  believes  himself  to  be  distinct 
from   the   products   of   those   three gun and   from   the   three gun 
themselves, and remains as the jeev alone, is known as nirgun.  So, he 
should  become nirgun in  this  way  and  develop  love  of Bhagvãn.  
Therefore, it is said: 
 
nairgunyasthã ramante sma gunãnu-kathane hareha 
Although the munis had attained the nirgun state, they still engaged 
themselves in praising the glory of Bhagvãn.  
 
parinishthitopi nairgunya uttam-shloka-leelayã 
gruheeta-chetã rãjarshe ãkhyanam yad-adheetavãn 
O King (Parikshit)!  Despite being perfectly poised in the nirgun state, having 
been attracted by the leelãs of Bhagvãn, I (Shukdevji) studied the Shreemad 
Bhãgvat. 
 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 402 - 
3.12
 “Those who possess gnãn after  having  realised  the  nature  of  the 
kshetra and  the kshetragna attain ãtmã-nishthã and  develop  love for 
Bhagvãn.      What   is   the kshetra?      Well,   the   three   bodies   (sthul, 
sukshma, and kãran) and the three mental states (jãgrat, svapna, and 
sushupti),  are  the kshetra.    Such  a  person  realises  the kshetra to  be 
distinct from his own ãtmã, and he feels, ‘Those can never be any part 
of me; I am the knower; I am extremely pure, formless, genderless, and 
chetan, while the kshetra is extremely impure, jad, and perishable’.  
Understanding  this  firmly,  a  person  who  develops vairãgya towards 
everything   else,   and   offers bhakti to Bhagvãn while   following 
svadharma,  is  known  to  possess ekãntik bhakti and gnãn.    A bhakta 
possessing this gnãn is superior to all.  In fact, Bhagvãn has said: 
 
teshãm gnãnee nitya-yukta eka-bhaktir-vishishyate 
priyo hi gnãnino tyartha-maham sa cha mama priyaha 
Of these – a person who is distressed from having fallen from the path of 
attaining siddh-dashã, and therefore still wishes to attain them; a person who 
seeks knowledge of the ãtmã; a person who desires material objects, material 
pleasures and powers; and a person who has gnãn – the person with gnãn is 
the best, as he is always engaged in me and is devoted to me alone.  I am 
exceedingly dear to a person with gnãn, and he is dear to me. 
 
udãrãha sarva evaite gnãnee tvãtmaiva me matam 
They are all noble, but I consider the one with gnãn to be my very ãtmã. 
 
3.13
 “Realising this, a person should uproot the indriyas, the antah-karans, 
and  the vishays from  the jeev,  and  develop  love  for Bhagvãn – only 
that  is  appropriate.    As  long  as  a  person  has  not  uprooted  them,  he 
should extract work from them in the form of the darshan or touch of 
Bhagvãn.    Moreover,  they  should  not  be  regarded  as  supporters; 
instead, they should be regarded as enemies.  In fact, a person should 
never feel gratitude towards them by thinking, ‘They are beneficial to 
me in offering bhakti to Bhagvãn’.    He  should  not feel  that  the  eyes 
enable a person to listen to the kathã of Bhagvãn; the skin enables a 
person  to  experience  the  touch  of Bhagvãn;  the  nose  enables  a 
person  to  experience  the  fragrance  of Bhagvãn’s mãlã and tulsi;  the 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 403 - 
mouth enables a person to engage in kathãs and sing kirtans in praise 
of Bhagvãn; and the tongue enables a person to experience the taste 
of Bhagvãn’s prasãd.    A  person  should  not  understand  them  to  be 
helpful  in  performing bhakti of Bhagvãn.    They  should  not  be  given 
gratitude,   nor   should   they   be   trusted.      Instead,   they   should   be 
regarded  only  as  enemies.    This  is  because  what  if  in  the  process  of 
experiencing  happiness  through  the darshan or  touch  of Bhagvãn, 
they lure a person to believe that there is pleasure in the darshan or 
touch  of  women  and  other  objects?    That  would  be  very  damaging.  
Therefore,  those  enemies  (the  five indriyas)  should  be  confined,  and 
work  in  the  form  of bhakti to Bhagvãn should  be  extracted  from 
them.    For  example,  a  king  who  has  captured  his  enemy  keeps  him 
chained and extracts work from him; never does the king free him or 
trust him.  If he were to free him or trust him, then the enemy would 
definitely  kill  the  king.    In  the  same  way,  if  a  person  trusts  his 
enemies  (the indriyas),  and  frees  them  and  does  not  keep  them 
confined, they will definitely make him fall from the path of Bhagvãn.  
Therefore, they should never be trusted. 
 
3.14
 “Also, just as the British arrest a criminal and keep him standing in a 
witness  box  to  question him,  without  freeing  him or  trusting  him,  in 
the same  way,  the indriyas and  the antah-karans should  be  kept in  a 
witness  box  and  in  chains  (the niyams of  the panch-vartmãn),  and 
then they should be made to offer bhakti to Bhagvãn.  However, they 
should  not be  given  any  gratitude;  they  should  be  looked  upon  only 
as  enemies.    If  the indriyas and  the antah-karans are  regarded  as 
supporters,  given  gratitude,  and  seen  to  be  useful  in bhakti,  then  in 
the process of experiencing the happiness of the darshan or touch of 
Bhagvãn,   they   will   lure   a   person   to   believe   that   there   is   some 
pleasure  in  women  and  other  objects.    As  a  result,  all  efforts  he  has 
made  will  become  useless.    For  example, if  one spark  of  fire  were  to 
fall  on  a  large  pile  of  gunpowder,  then  that  gunpowder  would  be 
completely reduced to ashes.  In this way, the stability of a person’s 
indriyas is not certain. 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 404 - 
3.15
 “Therefore, it is only appropriate that a person develops love for 
Bhagvãn while  behaving  as  the ãtmã.    That  is  my  principle,  and  a 
person who  develops  love  for Bhagvãn in  this  way  is  dear  to  me.  
Moreover,  he  should  think, ‘The beauty of Bhagvãn cannot be found 
anywhere  else;  the  touch  of  Bhagvãn  cannot  be  found  anywhere  else; 
the bliss experienced from hearing Bhagvãn cannot be found anywhere 
else; and the tastes related to Bhagvãn cannot be found anywhere else’.  
In this way, a person should tempt the indriyas and the antah-karans, 
and  divert  them  away  from  other vishays.    This  understanding  is 
appropriate.” 
 
3.16
 Then,  Svayamprakãshãnand  Swãmi said, “Mahãrãj, in which place 
should a person stay and develop all these thoughts?” 
 
3.17
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A person should think:  ‘I am not the sthul 
body,  the  sukshma  body,  or  the  kãran  body;  I  do  not  have  the  jãgrat, 
svapna,  or  sushupti  states;  I  am  not  the  five  gnãn-indriyas,  the  five 
karma-indriyas, the four antah-karans or their presiding devs; in fact, I 
am distinct from all these.  I am chaitanya; I am a bhakta of Bhagvãn’.  
If the indriyas and antah-karans misbehave in some way, they should 
be  disciplined  in  the  following  way:   ‘Do you wish to see the beauty 
only  of  Bhagvãn,  or  do  you  also  wish  to  see  the  beauty  of  others?    Do 
you  wish  to  listen  to  sounds  related  only  to  Bhagvãn  and  experience 
smells related to Him, or do you also wish to listen to other sounds and 
experience  other  smells?    If  you  do  crave  after  the  vishays  leaving 
Bhagvãn aside, then what is there between you and me?  Who are you 
and who am I?  I will have absolutely nothing to do with you.  Whatever 
you do, you will have to bear the consequences’. 
 
3.18
 “Lecturing the indriyas and antah-karans in this way, a person should 
pray  to Bhagvãn:   ‘O Mahãrãj!  O Swãmi!  You intensely love your 
bhaktas!    You  are  an  ocean  of  mercy!    The  fault  lies  with  the  indriyas 
and  antah-karans.    I  am  distinct  from  them.    In  fact,  they  are  my 
enemies.  So, please protect me from their influence’.  A person should 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 405 - 
constantly  offer  prayers  in  this  way;  and  understanding  his  own 
kshetragna to  be  composed  of chaitanya,  he  should  offer  love  and 
bhakti to Bhagvãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Panchãlã || 3 || 129 || 
 
 
Panchãlã – 4 
Perceiving Divinity In The Human Traits Of Bhagvãn 
 
4.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Fãgan  vad 3  [21
st
 March, 1821], Shreeji 
Mahãrãj was sitting on a decorated bedstead that had been placed on 
a  platform  in  Jhinã-Bhãi’s darbãr in  Panchãlã.    He  was  wearing  a 
white khes and  had  covered  Himself  with  a  white pachhedi.    He  had 
also  tied  a  white feto around  His  head.    In  addition  to  this,  He was 
turning  a mãlã of tulsi beads  in  His  hand.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as 
well as haribhaktas from various places, was gathered before Him. 
 
4.2
 Then,   Shreeji   Mahãrãj said   to   the paramhans,  “Please  begin  a 
question-answer discussion amongst yourselves.” 
 
4.3
 Then, Muni Bãvã asked a question to Brahmãnand Swãmi, “Initially, a 
person may have the belief of Bhagvãn and may engage in bhajan and 
smaran;  but  later,  on  seeing  the  human-like  actions  of Bhagvãn, 
doubts arise in that belief.  What is the cause of this?” 
 
4.4
 Brahmãnand  Swãmi  then  began  to  answer  that  question  but  was 
unable to do so satisfactorily. 
 
4.5
 Then,  having  thought  for  some  time,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj spoke, “I shall 
answer that question.”  Continuing, He said, “The Veds, the Purãns, 
the  Mahãbhãrat, the  Smrutis,  and  the  other shãstras state  that  the 
original svarup of Bhagvãn, which is eternal, without a beginning, and 
divya,  resides  in  His Akshardhãm.    They  also  mention  what  that 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 406 - 
Bhagvãn is like.  His svarup is not like any svarup that can be seen by 
the  eyes;  His  sound  is  not  like  any  sound  that  can  be  heard  by  the 
ears;  His  touch  is  not  like  any  touch  that  can  be  felt  by  the  skin;  His 
smell  is  not  like  any  smell  that  can  be  smelt  by  the  nose;  and  the 
tongue cannot describe that Bhagvãn.  He cannot be imagined by the 
man;  He  cannot  be  thought  of  by  the chitt;  He cannot  be  understood 
by  the buddhi;  nor  can  the ahankãr fully  claim, ‘I am Bhagvãn’s and 
Bhagvãn is mine’.  In this way, Bhagvãn remains beyond the reach of 
the indriyas and the antah-karans. 
 
4.6
 “Moreover, the beauty of Bhagvãn is such that it cannot be compared 
to  any  other  object  in  this brahmãnd – including  everything  from 
Brahmã to  the  smallest  blade  of  grass;  His  sound  is  such  that  it 
cannot be compared to any other sounds in this brahmãnd; The smell 
of Bhagvãn is  such  that  it  cannot  be  compared  to  any  other  smell  in 
this brahmãnd;  The  touch  of Bhagvãn is  such  that  it  cannot  be 
compared to any other touch in this brahmãnd; The tastes related to 
Bhagvãn are such that they cannot be compared to any other taste in 
the brahmãnd;  and  the dhãm of Bhagvãn is  such  that  it  cannot  be 
compared to any other place in this brahmãnd.  Specifically, out of all 
the   various   places   in   the   seven dvips and   the   nine khands,   the 
extremely beautiful places of Brahmã and others on Mount Meru, the 
various  places  on  Mount  Lokã-Lok,  the loks of Indra, Varun, Kuber, 
Shiv,  and Brahmã,  and  many  other  places,  not  one  of  them  can 
compare  to  the dhãm of Bhagvãn.    The  bliss  experienced  by  the 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn residing  in  that dhãm is  such  that  it  cannot  be 
compared to any other type of bliss in this brahmãnd. 
 
4.7
 “The svarup of that Bhagvãn is such that it cannot be compared to the 
svarup of anyone in this brahmãnd.  This is because all the svarups in 
this brahmãnd which  evolved  from Prakruti  and  Purush are mãyik, 
whereas Bhagvãn is divya.  So, since the two are totally different, how 
can  they  possibly  be  compared?    For  example,  we  can  compare  a 
person to something by saying, ‘This man is like a buffalo, like a snake, 
like  a  sparrow,  like  a  donkey,  like  a  dog,  like  a  crow,  or  like  an 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 407 - 
elephant’.    But  in  reality,  such  comparisons  are  not  appropriate  for 
humans.    This  is  because  all  of  those  animals  are  in  a  completely 
different  group  compared  to  humans.   Even  between  a  human  and  a 
human,  there  is  no  exact  similarity  where  a  person  can  claim, ‘This 
person is exactly like that person’.    If  he  were  exactly  like  the  other 
person, then how could the original person be recognised? 
 
4.8
  “Therefore, despite the fact  that  all  humans  belong  to  the  same 
group,  no  two  are  exactly  alike.    Just  look  at  Bhago  and  Mulo – the 
two are said to be identical; but, if a person stays with them for a few 
days, he can distinguish between them and say, ‘This is Bhago and this 
is   Mulo’.      But,   if   there   were   no   difference,   how   could   they   be 
recognised?    So,  if  there  is  no  great  similarity  between  that  which  is 
mãyik and that which is not mãyik, what can possibly be compared to 
Bhagvãn and  the dhãm of Bhagvãn?    After  all,  all shãstras claim, 
‘Bhagvãn is beyond the reach of the indriyas and the antah-karans’. 
 
4.9
 “When that Bhagvãn does not wish to give His darshan to beings, He 
stays in this way in His own Akshardhãm with a divya svarup, and as a 
result He remains beyond reach.  That Bhagvãn is the lord of all lords, 
He  is  surrounded  by  countless divya luxuries  and  countless divya 
pãrshads, and He is the lord of countless millions of brahmãnds. 
 
4.10
 “Take  the  example  of  a  great  world-emperor   whose   kingdom 
stretches from where the sun rises to where it sets.  This emperor, by 
the  strength  of  his  own tap, has  attained divine powers  like  those  of 
the devs, and is ruling over the loks of Svarg, Mrutyu-Lok, and Pãtãl – 
just like Arjun, who remained on the throne of Indra in Svarg-Lok for 
many  years  with  his  own  body,  and  Nahush  Rãjã,  who  also  became 
Indra.  The emperor is so powerful, that it is not possible to count the 
villages in his kingdom, as they are innumerable.  The chiefs of these 
villages   also   cannot   be   counted,   as   they   are   also   innumerable.  
Furthermore, the countless chiefs of those villages come to his darbãr 
to  make  requests.    The  emperor’s  money,  property,  pleasures, 
palaces, and wealth are also countless.   

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 408 - 
4.11
 “Just like the emperor, Bhagvãn is  the  king  of  the  kings  of  countless 
villages   (brahmãnds).      Moreover,   the   chiefs   of   those   villages 
(brahmãnds) are Brahmã, Vishnu, and Shiv.  Just as in one village one 
chief  is  senior  and  the  whole  population  of  that  village  bows  before 
him  and  follows  his ãgnã,  and  just  as  the  chief  in  turn  bows  before 
the  king,  similarly,  in  each brahmãnd,  Brahmã, Vishnu,  and Shiv are 
senior,  and  the  others  in  that brahmãnd,  that  are  the devs,  demons, 
humans, rushis, and prajãpatis of  that brahmãnd,  worship  them  and 
follow  their ãgnã.    But, Brahmã, Vishnu,  and Shiv in  turn  worship 
Purushottam Bhagvãn and  follow  His ãgnã.    Furthermore,  all  the 
Brahmãs, Vishnus,  and Shivs of  all  the brahmãnds pray  to Bhagvãn, 
‘Mahãrãj!  Please have compassion on us and visit our brahmãnd’ – just 
as  the  chief  of  a  village  requests  the  world-emperor, ‘Mahãrãj!  I am 
poor.  Please visit my house.  I shall serve you to the best of my ability’.  
In   the   same   way, Brahmã, Vishnu,   and Shiv pray   to Bhagvãn, 
‘Mahãrãj!  Please have mercy upon us and grace us with your darshan; 
visit our brahmãnd’.    Only  then  does Bhagvãn assume  a  body  in  that 
brahmãnd. 
 
4.12
 “Moreover, He assumes a body based on the task to be performed 
there, and He also behaves accordingly.  If He assumes the body of a 
dev, then He behaves exactly like a dev.  If He assumes the body of an 
animal,  then  He  behaves  exactly  like  an  animal.    For  example,  when 
Bhagvãn assumed   the svarup of Varãh,   He   found   the   earth   by 
smelling  it.  When  He  became Hayagriv,  He  started  to  neigh  like  a 
horse.    When  He  assumed  the  bodies  of  water  creatures,  such  as 
Matsya and Kurma,  He  moved  only  in  water,  but  not  on  land.    When 
He became the svarup of Nrusinh, He behaved exactly like a lion, not 
like a human. 
 
4.13
 “When  that Bhagvãn assumes  the svarup of  a  human  being,  He 
behaves  exactly  like  a  human.    During Satya-Yug,  the  lifespan  of 
humans is one hundred thousand years, so Bhagvãn also lives for one 
hundred  thousand  years.    Also,  just  as  people  in Satya-Yug can 
indulge  in  any  object  their  mind  desires, Bhagvãn also  indulges  in 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 409 - 
objects  in  the  same  way;  He  does  not  behave  in  any  extraordinary 
way.  In Tretã-Yug, the lifespan of humans is ten thousand years.  So, 
when Bhagvãn is  born  in Tretã-Yug,  He  also  lives  for  ten  thousand 
years.    In Dvãpar-Yug,  the  lifespan  of  humans  is  one  thousand  years, 
and  humans  possess  the  strength  of  ten  thousand  elephants.    So, 
Bhagvãn also possesses the same strength and has the same lifespan.  
Finally,  when Bhagvãn is  born  in Kali-Yug,  He  assumes  the  lifespan 
and strength of humans according to the humans of Kali-Yug. 
 
4.14
 “Just as a child is conceived, then develops in the womb, then is born, 
then  undergoes  the  phases  of  childhood,  youth,  and  old  age,  and 
eventually  dies, Bhagvãn also  undergoes  the  same  process,  exactly 
like a human.  Also, just as humans possess svabhãvs –  such as kãm, 
krodh, lobh, svãd, mãn, sneh, mad, matsar, irshyã, moh, ãshã, trushnã, 
hatred, attachment, infatuation, happiness, misery, fear, fearlessness, 
bravery, cowardice, hunger, thirst, sleep, prejudice, a feeling that this 
belongs to others, a feeling that this belongs to me, tyãg, vairãgya – in 
the same way, all of those svabhãvs are apparent in Bhagvãn when He 
assumes  a  human  body.    All  the shãstras have  also  described  that 
human svarup of Bhagvãn along  with  His  original, divya svarup.    A 
person,  who  has  developed  a  firm nishchay of  both  of  those svarups 
through intense shravan and manan,  never  has  any  doubts;  whereas 
a  person  who  lacks  this  type  of  understanding  does  have  doubts 
about Bhagvãn. 
 
4.15
 “When that Bhagvãn – who  possesses  a divya svarup – assumes  a 
human body, He behaves with svabhãvs similar to humans.  However, 
an intelligent person realises, ‘He possesses kãm, but it is not like that 
of  other  humans.    In  fact,  krodh,  lobh,  svãd,  mãn, and  other  human 
svabhãvs  are  also  present  in  Bhagvãn,  but  they  are  certainly  not  like 
those possessed by other humans’.    An  intelligent  person  also  realises 
that  there  is  something divya about  that Bhagvãn,  and  with  this 
understanding,  he  develops  the  belief  of  Him  being Bhagvãn.    For 
example, Shankar-Ãchãrya entered the body of a king in order to gain 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 410 - 
knowledge of certain affectionate details.  Therefore, at that time, his 
bodily  gestures  and  his  emotions  were  all  affectionate  like  those  of 
the  king.    However,  the  queen  was  intelligent  and  realised, ‘My 
husband  did  not  possess  such  powers;  therefore,  some  other  jeev  has 
entered  his  body’.    In  the  same  way, divya qualities  are  apparent  in 
Bhagvãn in   human svarup.      As   a   result,   a   person   develops   the 
nishchay in Him being Bhagvãn. 
 
4.16
 “Then you may say, ‘If someone develops the nishchay in Bhagvãn  on 
noticing  something  divya,  then  if  He  were  to  display  divya  qualities, 
many people would develop the same belief’.  However, the fact of the 
matter is as follows:  All the shãstras refer to the sun by saying, ‘It is 
Bhagvãn’.  Moreover, that sun is visible to everyone, and people do its 
darshan daily.  Despite this, no person has ever been convinced of his 
or her own kalyãn as a result of its darshan, and they do not believe, ‘I 
have attained kalyãn’.  On the other hand, after having the darshan of 
Rãm, Krishna,  and  the  other avatãrs in  human svarup,  and  of Nãrad, 
Shukji, and other sãdhus, people do attain the belief that my kalyãn is 
certainly  guaranteed,  and  I  am  fulfilled.    Even  though  there  is  no 
divine light in that Bhagvãn and those sãdhus, and a person can only 
have   their darshan after   lighting   an   oil   lamp,   he   still   becomes 
convinced of his own kalyãn. 
 
4.17
 “Consider another example:  Fire is also a visible svarup of Bhagvãn, 
as Bhagvãn has said: 
  
aham vaishvãnaro bhootvã prãninãm deha-mãshritaha 
prãnãpãna-samãyuktaha pachãmyanam chaturvirdham 
Remaining in the bodies of all being as Vaishvanar (the fire of digestion), I 
digest the four types of food (chewable, drinkable, lickable, and suckable) with 
the help of prãn vãyu (inhaled air) and apãn vãyu (air that pushes food 
downwards). 
 
4.18
 “The darshan of  that  fire  is  available  to  all,  but  that  does  not  grant 
people  belief  of  their  own kalyãn,  whereas  with  the darshan of 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 411 - 
Bhagvãn and His sãdhu, they do gain belief of their own kalyãn.  The 
reason for this is that there is a difference between humans, and the 
sun and fire; as a result, a person is not convinced of his kalyãn upon 
having  the darshan of  the  sun  or  fire.    Instead,  if  someone  touches 
fire,  he  will  be  burnt.    Furthermore,  when  Kuntãji  called  upon Surya 
using the mantra given by Durvãsã, Surya came to Kuntãji in a human 
svarup just like Kuntãji’s own svarup.    As  a  result,  she  was  able  to 
enjoy his intimacy, and therefore conceived Karna.  In actuality, Surya 
is extremely luminous; and if he had come with all of his light, Kuntãji 
would have been burnt to death, and she would not have been able to 
enjoy his intimacy.  Also, when Surya used to come to Satrãjit Yãdav, 
he came as a human.  However, when he came to Kuntãji and came to 
Satrãjit, did he leave his place in the sky?  He remained in the sky; but 
assuming  another svarup,  that  very  same Surya came  to  Kuntãji  and 
Satrãjit.  Moreover, there was just as much luminosity in that svarup 
as there is in the sun, but he suppressed that luminosity and came as 
a human. 
 
4.19
 “In the same way, if Bhagvãn were to give darshan to beings with all 
of  His divya qualities,  then  humans  would  not  find  it  suitable,  and 
they  would  wonder, ‘Is this a ghost, or what?’  Therefore, Bhagvãn 
suppresses  His  own divya powers  and  gives darshan exactly  like  a 
human.    But,  at  the  same  time,  He  still  remains  present  in  His  own 
dhãm.    Only  when Bhagvãn comes  as  a  human  are  people  able  to  do 
His darshan, touch Him, and offer the nine types of bhakti. 
 
4.20
 “If Bhagvãn does not become like a human and instead behaves with 
complete divya qualities,  then  people  would  not  be  able  to  develop 
love  or  feelings  of  friendship for  Him.    This  is  because  a  human 
develops   love   and friendship   for   another   human,   and   animals 
develop  mutual  love  and  friendship for  other  animals;  but  humans 
and  animals  do  not  develop  the  same  love  and  friendship  for  each 
other.    Therefore,  those  belonging  to  the  same  group  develop  love 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 412 - 
towards  each  other,  but  not  towards  those  belonging  to  a  different 
group. 
 
4.21
 “Similarly, Bhagvãn suppresses   His divya qualities   and   becomes 
exactly like a human so that His bhaktas can develop love for Him.  He 
does  not  exhibit  His divya qualities.    Exhibiting  His divya qualities 
would place Him in a different group, and as a result, bhaktas would 
not be able to develop love and friendship towards Him.  It is for this 
reason  that  when Bhagvãn appears  in  human svarup,  He  remains 
extremely cautious  to  ensure  that  His divya qualities  remain  hidden.  
However,  if  He  were  to  become  a  little  impatient  in  some  task,  His 
divya qualities would  become  apparent.    Occasionally,  by  His  own 
wish, He may reveal His divya qualities to some bhakta.  For example, 
as Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn became  impatient  to  kill  Bhishma,  He 
forgot his human-like nature and reverted to His divya powers.  As a 
result,  the  earth  was  incapable  of  bearing  the  burden.    When  He 
revealed His divya qualities to Arjun, it was revealed as a result of His 
own wish.  However, Arjun did not experience bliss due to that divya 
qualities,  and  he  become  very  uneasy.    Then,  when Shree  Krishna 
Bhagvãn gave darshan to   Arjun   in   His   human svarup,   Arjun 
experienced bliss and said: 
 
drusht-vedam mãnusham rupam tava saumyam janãrdana 
idaneem-asmi samvruttaha sachetãha prakrutim gataha 
Vanquisher of the evil (Krishna)!  Having seen your gentle human svarup, I am 
now calm and have been restored to my original nature. 
 
4.22
 “Therefore, a person only finds it suitable when Bhagvãn behaves 
like  a  human;  otherwise  he  would  not.    Yet,  when Bhagvãn behaves 
as  a  human,  a  person  who  does  not  have  this  understanding  would 
find   it   difficult   to   accept   His   human-like   nature.      Moreover,   if 
Bhagvãn were to behave with only divya qualities, a person would be 
unable  to  understand  all  that  is  beyond  the  reach  of  the  mind  and 
speech.  For this reason, the shãstras have described Bhagvãn in both 
ways.    A  person  who  has  fully  realised  Him  in  this  way  would  not 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 413 - 
develop  any  doubts;  but,  doubts  would  certainly  arise  in  a  person 
who does not understand in this way. 
 
4.23
 “Someone may claim, ‘I have realised Bhagvãn, and I have nishchay in 
Bhagvãn’.  But, if he has not understood this talk, then his nishchay is 
still  imperfect.    For  example,  a  person  may  have  learnt  a shlok or  a 
kirtan.    If  he  were  asked, ‘Have you learnt this shlok or kirtan?’ he 
would reply that he has, and he would also be able to recite it.  But, if 
he were to forget that shlok or kirtan after a few days, then it can be 
said  that  when  he  originally  learnt  the shlok,  he  had  not  learnt  it 
properly.  This is because that shlok or kirtan was not fully imprinted 
in his jeev through intense practice, and through shravan and manan.  
However,  if  something  is  learnt  in  childhood  thoroughly,  then  it  can 
be recalled when required, even during youth or old age.  In the same 
way,   when   that   person   attempted   to   develop   the nishchay in 
Bhagvãn,   some   deficiencies   remained.      If   no   deficiencies   had 
remained, and if he had done shravan, manan, and intense repetition 
in his jeev, then he would never have had any doubts at all.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Panchãlã || 4 || 130 || 
 
 
Panchãlã – 5 
Pride And Humility 
 
5.1
 In the Samvat year 1877, on Fãgan vad 8 [27
th
 March, 1821], Shreeji 
Mahãrãj was sitting on a decorated bedstead that had been placed on 
a  platform  in  Jhinã-Bhãi’s darbãr in  Panchãlã.    He  was  wearing  a 
white khes and  a  warm,  red dagli.    He  had  also  tied  a  white feto 
around  His head.   In  addition  to  this,  He had covered  Himself  with a 
white chãdar.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from 
various places, has gathered before Him. 
 
5.2
 Then, Svayamprakãshãnand Swãmi asked a question:  “When is pride 
appropriate,  and  when  is  it  not  appropriate?    When  is  humbleness 
appropriate, and when is it not appropriate?” 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 414 - 
5.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “It is appropriate to have pride before a 
person  who  spites satsang,  or  speaks  offensively  of Bhagvãn or  His 
great sant.    If  someone  does  speak  offensively,  a  person  should 
retaliate  with  words  as  sharp  as  an  arrow;  but  in  no  way  should  he 
become   humble   before   a vimukh.      In   such   a   situation,   that   is 
appropriate.    On  the  other  hand,  it  is  not  appropriate  to  have  pride 
before Bhagvãn or   His sant.      Before   them,   putting   pride   aside, 
behaving   as   a dãs of   a dãs,   and   becoming   humble,   is   the   only 
appropriate behaviour.” 
 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Panchãlã || 5 || 131 || 
 
 
Panchãlã – 6 
Those With Firm Upãsanã Attain Kalyãn 
 
6.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on  the  night  of Fãgan  vad 9  [28
th
 March, 
1821],  Shreeji  Mahãrãj was sitting  on  a decorated bedstead  that had 
been placed on a platform of Jhinã-Bhãi’s darbãr in Panchãlã.  He was 
wearing a warm, red dagli along with a white angarkhu.  He had also 
tied a white feto around His head.  In addition to this, He was wearing 
a  white khes and  had  covered  Himself  with  a  thin,  white  cloth.    A 
sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had 
gathered before Him. 
 
6.2
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “I  thought for  quite  some  time,  and 
having  mentally  skimmed  through  all  the shãstras,  it  has  become 
apparent  that  there  has  not  been  any avatãr as  powerful  as Shree 
Krishna.        This    is    because Shree    Krishna has    exhibited    the 
characteristics of all of His other countless svarups within Himself. 
 
6.3
 “Firstly, after Devki gave birth to Him, He gave darshan in  a  four-
armed svarup holding  a shankh,  a chakra,  a gadã,  and  a padma, 
thereby  revealing  in  Himself  the  characteristics  of  the  husband  of 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 415 - 
Lakshmi, Bhagvãn.  To His mother Yashodã, He showed the Vishvarup 
form   in   His   own   mouth,   which   revealed   the   characteristics   of 
Aniruddha in Himself through His thousand-headed svarup.  He gave 
darshan to   Akrur   in   the   river   Yamunã,   thereby   revealing   the 
characteristics  of  Shesh-Shãyi.    He  showed  the Vishvarup form  to 
Arjun on the battlefield: 
 
pashya me pãrth rupãni shata-shotha sahastra-shaha 
O Son of Pruthã (Arjun).  Behold my hundreds and thousands of divine 
svarups. 
 
“Shree  Krishna showed   countless brahmãnds and   revealed   the 
characteristics of Purushottam.  
 
6.4
 “Moreover, Shree Krishna has said: 
 
yasmãt-ksharama-teeto-hama-ksharãd-api chottamaha 
atosmi loke vede cha prathitaha Purushottamaha 
I am greater than all that is perishable, and I am greater than even the 
imperishable. Therefore, I am known in the Smrutis and Veds as 
‘Purushottam’. 
 
“In this way, He revealed Himself as Purushottam.    Also,  He  was  the 
Shree Krishna who resides in Golok with Rãdhikã. 
 
6.5
 “When Shree  Krishna went  to  retrieve  the brãhman’s son,  He  gave 
darshan to  Arjun  as  Bhumã-Purush.    It  was Vãsudev,  who  resides  in 
Shvet-Dvip who Himself assumed that avatãr.  Moreover, throughout 
the  Mahãbhãrat  and  the  Shreemad  Bhãgvat, Nãr-Nãrãyan has  been 
referred  to  as  that Shree  Krishna Himself.    Therefore,  the murtis, 
strength,  and divya powers  of  that  same Bhagvãn,  which  reside  in 
that avatãr of Shree   Krishna in   various   ways,   are   complete.  
Therefore,   that avatãr was   very   great.      After   all,   other svarups 
possessed a few divya powers, whereas Shree Krishna was filled with 
all divya powers.    Therefore,  there  is  no avatãr like  the avatãr of 
Krishna;  that avatãr reigns  as sarvopari.    Only  some  powers  have 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 416 - 
been  revealed  through  the  other avatãrs.    However,  this avatãr has 
revealed all divya powers and strengths.  Therefore, this avatãr is the 
greatest of all. 
 
6.6
 “If a person has a firm belief of the pratyaksha Shree  Krishna in  this 
way,  and  if  that  belief  never  changes  in  any  way,  then  even  if  he 
happens to disobey an ãgnã due to the influence of kusang, he would 
not  fall  from  the  path  of kalyãn;  he  would  certainly  attain kalyãn.  
Therefore, if all of you paramhans and haribhaktas also develop such 
firmness  of  the upãsanã of Bhagvãn in  this  way,  then  even  if  you 
happen  to  slightly  disobey  an ãgnã,  you  will  still  ultimately  attain 
kalyãn.” 
 
6.7
 Hearing  this talk,  all  the sãdhus  and haribhaktas realised  Shreeji 
Mahãrãj as the cause of all, which strengthened their upãsanã. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Panchãlã || 6 || 132 || 
 
 
Panchãlã – 7 
The ‘Mãyã’ Of A Magician 
   
7.1
 In the Samvat year 1877, about two-and-a-half hours after sunrise on 
Fãgan  vad 11  [29
th
 March,  1821],  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a 
decorated  bedstead  that  had  been  placed  on  a  platform  in  Jhinã-
Bhãi’s darbãr in  Panchãlã.    He  was  wearing  a  warm,  red dagli and  a 
white khes.    He  had  also  tied  a  white feto around  His  head.    In 
addition  to  this,  He  had  covered  Himself  with  a  white pachhedi.    A 
sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had 
gathered before Him. 
 
7.2
 In  the sabhã,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj had  Nityãnand  Swãmi  read  a  passage 
from  the  first skandh of  the  Shreemad  Bhãgvat.    The  first shlok he 
read was: 
 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 417 - 
janmãdyasya yatah-nvayad-itaratash-chãrtheshvabhignaha svarãt 
tene brahma  hrudã ya ãdikavaye muhyanti yat-soorayaha 
tejo-vãri-mrudãm yathã vinimayo yatra trisargo mrushã 
dhãmnã svena sadã nirasta-kuhakam satyam param dheemahi 
 
7.3
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj Himself  began  to  explain  the  meaning  of  the 
third  line  of  that shlok: “A person should realise  that  the  entities 
evolved  out  of  the  three gun of Mãyã,  which  are  the  five bhuts,  the 
indriyas,   the antah-karans,   and   their   presiding devs,   are   never 
present  in Bhagvãn at  any  time – past,  present,  or  future.    Also,  a 
person   should   interpret   the   last   line   as   the shlok,   as   follows:  
Bhagvãn,  via  His  own svarup (dhãm), destroyed  the  deception  (the 
products  of mãyã).    This  is  the  supremely satya svarup of Bhagvãn.  
Moreover,    just    as    the svarup of Bhagvãn in Akshardhãm is 
magnificent with countless divine powers and divine light at the end 
of ãtyantik-pralay, a person should realise exactly the same regarding 
pratyaksha  Bhagvãn in  human svarup.    A  person  who  realises  this  is 
said to have known Bhagvãn perfectly. 
 
7.4
 “However, when a foolish person looks at pratyaksha Bhagvãn with a 
mãyik vision, he sees a human like himself.  Also, just as he himself is 
born, becomes a child, becomes a youth, becomes old and dies, in the 
same way,  he  believes Bhagvãn to  undergo  the  same  process.    But, 
when  he  worships Bhagvãn with  the  sincerity,  having  faith  in  the 
words  of  the ekãntik  sant of Bhagvãn,  his mãyik vision  disappears.  
Then,  a  person  realises  that  same svarup of Bhagvãn as  being  the 
supreme chaitanya,  which  is sachidãnand.    The  Shreemad  Bhãgvat 
also mentions: 
 
sa veda dhãtuha padaveem parasya duranta-veeryasya rathãnga-panehe 
yo-mãyayã santa-tayãnu-vruttya bhajeta tat-pãda-saroja-gandhama 
He who, having become free from mãyã, serves the holy feet of Bhagvãn, will 
constantly follow His wishes, and attain the state of Bhagvãn – who holds a 
chakra in His hand, has infinite powers, and is the supporter of the universe. 
 
7.5
 “The phases of childhood, youth, and old age apparent in Bhagvãn, as 
well  as  His  birth  and  death,  are  all  seen  due  to  His  extraordinary 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 418 - 
powers of creating an illusion.  In reality, Bhagvãn remains absolutely 
unchanged.      For   example,   a   skilled  magician   arms  himself   with 
weapons  and  ascends  to  the  sky  to  fight  against  the  warriors  of  the 
demons – the  enemies  of Indra.    Then,  having  been  cut  to  pieces,  he 
falls to the ground.  Then, the magician’s wife gathers those pieces 
together  and  burns  herself  on  his  funeral  pyre.    After  a  short  while, 
the magician appears out of the sky, armed with weapons, exactly as 
he appeared before.  He then asks the king for a reward and requests, 
‘Please  return  my  wife’.        Having    seen    such    an    astonishing 
performance, if a person is unable to comprehend the ‘mãyã’ of even 
a  magician,  how  then  can  the  extraordinary  powers  of Bhagvãn 
possibly  be  comprehended?    A  person  who  does  comprehend  that 
‘mãyã’ of the magician, realises:  ‘That magician has not died, nor has 
he been burnt.  In reality, he is exactly the same as he was before’.  In a 
similar  way,  a  person  who  is  said  to  have  realised  the svarup of 
Bhagvãn perfectly,    understands Bhagvãn to    be    eternal    and 
imperishable, and absolutely  unchanging.    For  example,  when Shree 
Krishna Bhagvãn left  His  body,  Rukmani  and  the  other  wives  of 
Bhagvãn took His body and burnt themselves along with Him.  At that 
time,  the  ignorant  people  thought, ‘Now He is dead’.    On  the  other 
hand,  those  who  possessed gnãn,  thought, ‘He has disappeared from 
here and has gone elsewhere’.    They  understood Bhagvãn as  being 
eternal.  As a result, Shree Krishna Himself has said: 
 
avajananti mãm moodha mãnusheem tanum-ãshritam 
param bhãvam-ajãnanto mama bhoota-maheshvaram 
Fools mock me as having a human svarup, but they do not realise my divya 
svarup as the great lord of all beings. 
 
7.6
 “So,  if  a  fool  understands Bhagvãn as   being sãkãr,   then   he 
understands  Him  as  being  merely  like  a  human;  or  he  understands 
Bhagvãn as  being nirãkãr so  that  He  is  not  considered mãyik like 
other mãyik svarups.    In  this  way,  a  fool  misunderstands on  both 
accounts. 
 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 419 - 
7.7
 “But, if Bhagvãn did not have a svarup, then what about the fact that 
Shrutis  have  said  that  during ãtyantik-pralay, ‘sa ikshata’, meaning, 
‘That Bhagvãn saw...’.  If Bhagvãn ‘saw’, then He had to have a svarup, 
possessing eyes, ears and other organs.  Moreover, it is said:   
 
purushenãtam-bhootena veeryamã-dhatta veeryavãnã 
Purushottam became the svarup of Purush and impregnated Mãyã.  
 
“Therefore, Bhagvãn has always had a svarup. 
 
7.8
 “Moreover,  when  that Purushottam Nãrãyan takes  the svarup of 
Purush for  some  task,  that Purush is  hidden  by  the  divine  light  of 
Purushottam, and only Purushottam remains.  In the same way, when 
Purushottam takes the form of Mãyã, that Mãyã is also hidden by the 
divine light of Purushottam, and only Bhagvãn remains in that svarup.  
Then, Bhagvãn takes  the svarup of maha-tattva,  then  the svarups of 
others  evolved  from maha-tattva,  then  the svarup of Virãt,  then  the 
svarup of Brahmã and  others  created  from  that Virãt-Purush,  and 
then   the svarup of Nãrad and   the Sanakãdik.      In   this   way,   in 
whomever  that Purushottam Bhagvãn ‘enters’ for the purpose of 
fulfilling many types of tasks, He hides that entity by His own divine 
light, and He Himself reigns supreme through that entity.  Moreover, 
in whomever He resides, He suppresses their own light and displays 
His own divine light – just as when fire enters iron, it suppresses the 
quality  of coldness  and  the  black colour  of  that  iron,  and  exhibits its 
own quality.   
 
7.9
 “Also, when the sun rises, the light from all the stars and the moon, 
merges  into  its  own  light,  and  only  the  sun’s light remains.  In the 
same way, Bhagvãn overpowers the light of whoever He ‘enters’ and 
exhibits   His   own   divine   light   to   a   greater   degree.      Then,   after 
completing  that  task  for  which  He  had  ‘entered’  that  entity,  He 
separates  from  the  entity;  and  the entity  remains  as  it  was  before.  
Therefore,  the  additional  powers  that  the  entity  appeared  to  have 
should be known to actually be the power of Purushottam Bhagvãn. 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 420 - 
7.10
 “In this way, the pratyaksha Purushottam Nãrãyan is the cause of all; 
He  is  forever divya and  is sãkãr.    A  person  should  not  perceive  any 
type  of  imperfections in  that murti – it  is  like  a murti made  of sãkar.  
Also,  he  should  perform dhyãn, bhajan,  and  offer bhakti only  to  the 
murti that  he  has  seen.    Furthermore,  whichever  human  traits  seem 
apparent in that Bhagvãn should be understood to be like the ‘mãyã’ 
of  a  magician.    A  person  who  has  such  an  understanding  does  not 
develop delusion for that Bhagvãn in any way. 
 
7.11
 “These talks can be understood by a person with the following firm 
belief:   ‘Even at the time of ãtyantik-pralay,  Bhagvãn  and  His  bhaktas 
remain  in  Akshardhãm,  where  the  bhaktas  enjoy  divya  bliss,  having 
attained  a  divya  murti.    Moreover,  the  murti  of  that  Bhagvãn  and  the 
svarups   of   the   bhaktas   of   Bhagvãn   possess   divine   light   that   is 
equivalent to the light of countless suns and moons’.    Only  a  person 
with such firm understanding is able to understand these talks. 
 
7.12
 “Also, that Bhagvãn – who has a luminous and divya murti – becomes 
like  a  human  out  of  compassion,  to  give kalyãn to  the jeevs  and  to 
allow  those jeevs  to  offer  the  nine  types  of bhakti to  Him;  and    He 
always does so with all of His strength, divine powers, and pãrshads.  
Even  then,  those  who  realise  this  complex  truth  understand  the 
human svarup of Bhagvãn on this  earth  as  being  exactly  the  same  as 
the svarup of Bhagvãn residing in Akshardhãm – they do not feel that 
there is even a slight difference between that svarup and this svarup.  
A  person  who  has  known Bhagvãn in  this  way  can  be  said  to  have 
known Bhagvãn perfectly.    For  him, mãyã can  be  said  to  have  been 
eradicated.    A  person  who  realises  this  is  called  a bhakta with gnãn 
and  an ekãntik bhakta.    Moreover,  if  by  chance  a  person  possessing 
such    firm upãsanã of pratyaksha    Bhagvãn were    to    behave 
inappropriately due to the influence of kusang or due to the influence 
of his own prãrabdha karmas, even then he would attain kalyãn.  On 
the other hand, a person who has doubts in realising Bhagvãn in this 
way, even if he is a strict urdhvaretã naishtik brahm-chãri and a great 
tyãgi, attaining kalyãn would still be extremely difficult for him. 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 421 - 
7.13
 “If a person has, from the beginning, developed a firm belief that 
Bhagvãn is sãkãr even at the end of ãtyantik-pralay, and if he were to 
listen  to shãstras describing Bhagvãn as  being  merely  full  of  divine 
light and nirãkãr, or if he were to hear such talks from someone, even 
then  he  would  not  have  doubts.    This  is  because  he  has  realised, 
‘Bhagvãn is eternally sãkãr and is never nirãkãr.  Furthermore, that 
very  Bhagvãn  assumes  different  murtis, such as Rãm and Krishna’.  A 
person  with  such  firm  understanding  should  be  known  to  have 
perfect nishchay.” 
 
7.14
 In  this  way,  for  the  purpose  of  enlightening  His bhaktas,  Shreeji 
Mahãrãj talked  about  the  unparalleled nishchay of  His  own svarup.  
On  hearing  this,  all  the paramhans and bhaktas strengthened  their 
nishchay in Shreeji Mahãrãj’s svarup as described. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Panchãlã || 7 || 133 || 
 
 
|| End of Shree Panchãlã Prakaran ||

GADHADÃ II 
- 422 - 
|| SHREE SWÃMINÃRAYAN VIJAYTETRÃM || 
 
VACHANÃMRUT 
Shree Gadhadã Madhya Prakaran 
 
Gadhadã II – 1 
The Elimination Of Moh 
 
1.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Jyeshth sud Punam [15
th
 June  1821], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   the   veranda 
outside   the   west-facing   rooms   in   front   of   the mandir of Shree 
Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was 
wearing  a  white khes and  had  covered  Himself  with  a  white chãdar.  
He  had  also  tied  a  white pãgh around  His  head,  and  was  wearing  a 
garland  of  white  flowers.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas 
from   various   places,   had   gathered   before   Him.      Some   of   the 
paramhans were  singing kirtans to  the  accompaniment  of  a jhãnjh 
and mrudang. 
 
1.2
 Shreeji   Mahãrãj   then   said   to   the paramhans who   were   singing 
kirtans,  “Please  stop  singing  for  the  time  being,  and  conduct  a 
question-answer discussion.” 
 
1.3
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi bowed to Shreeji Mahãrãj with folded hands 
and asked, “Mahãrãj, what is that nature of moh?  Also, how can moh 
be eliminated?” 
 
1.4
 After thinking for a short while, Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “It seems 
that  a  feeling  of  illusion  which  often  appears in  the  mind  is  the  very 
nature of moh.  When moh intensifies in a person’s heart, the illusion 
in  his  mind  also  intensifies.    He  then  loses  all  sense  of  judgment  of 
what should be done and what should not be done. 
 
1.5
 “In fact,  just today, I  was  thinking  about  the  reason  behind the 
development  of moh.    Last  night,  I  awoke  in  the  middle  of  the  night 

GADHADÃ II 
- 423 - 
and  slept  facing  north.    Upon  seeing  the  Dhruv  Star,  the  following 
thought  arose:   ‘This is the northern Dhruv, but the shãstras also 
mention a southern Dhruv.  Where could that be?’  Then,  I  looked  for 
the southern Dhruv  and I  saw  it  as  well.    Just  as  there is  a  pulley for 
drawing  water  from  a  well,  I  saw  a  similar  large  pulley  between  the 
two  Dhruv  stars.    The  tips  of  the  two  supports  of  the  wheel  were 
touching  the  Dhruv  stars,  just  as  wooden  pillars  are  held  up  by  iron 
rods hammered between them.  Also, just as a rope is wound around 
a rope-wheel which is studded with brass ornaments, similarly, I saw 
the positions of all the stars, the devs, and the nine planets, arranged 
around  that  rope-wheel.    I  also  saw  the  sun  and  moon  rise  and  set 
from  the  same  direction.    Then,  looking  within,  I  saw  that  all  things 
that   are   in   the brahmãnd are   also   all   in   the  body.      I   saw   the 
kshetragna that resides in the body.  I also saw Purushottam Bhagvãn, 
who  resides  within  that kshetragna.    On  seeing  that Bhagvãn,  my 
vrutti became so deeply engrossed in His svarup, that returning out of 
samãdhi seemed  impossible.    But,  a bhakta then  came  near  and 
prayed to me.  It was only out of compassion that I was able to return 
into this body. 
 
1.6
 “Then, the following thought arose in my mind:  ‘I was able to return 
from  samãdhi  due  to  compassion,  but  what  could  be  the  reason  for 
others coming out of samãdhi?’  It seemed to me that they come out of 
samãdhi because there is still an attachment for some vishays. 
 
1.7
 “Therefore, the panch-vishays are the cause of moh.  Moreover, there 
are three levels of those vishays – uttam, madhyam, and kanishth.  Of 
these,   if   a   person   who   has   obtained uttam   vishays encounters 
someone  who  obstructs  him  from  them,  then  that  person  becomes 
angry with him.  From that anger, moh develops. 
 
1.8
 “Generally, the ears have a constant relationship with sounds, and 
the skin has a constant relationship with touch.  In this way, the five 
gnãn-indriyas are  related  to  the vishays.  Therefore,  if  a  person  who 

GADHADÃ II 
- 424 - 
has casually seen an object wishes to break his vrutti from that object 
and  keep it  focused on  the svarup of Bhagvãn instead,  then  no effort 
is  required;  his vrutti would  become  detached  quite  easily  from  the 
vishays and remain on the svarup of Bhagvãn.  On the other hand, if a 
person has seen an extremely charming object, such as a woman, and 
his vrutti has  become  fixed  on  that,  then even  if  he  attempts  to  keep 
this vrutti on Bhagvãn’s svarup, it will not stay there; and nor will his 
chitt remain  steady.    Therefore,  as  long  as  the chitt is  attracted  by 
charming vishays, moh cannot  be  eradicated.    Moreover,  if  a sant,  or 
his guru,  or  his ishta-dev (Bhagvãn)  criticises  a vishay which  has 
attracted his chitt, he would become upset with them and even insult 
them;   he   would   not   be   able   to   accept   their   words.      Such   an 
experience in a person’s heart should be known as moh.  In addition, 
Bhagvãn has said in the Geetã: 
 
dhyãyato vishayan-punsaha sanga-steshu-pajãyate 
sangat-sanjãyate kãmaha kãmãt-krodho-bhijãyate 
krodhãd-bhavati sammohaha sammohãt-smruti-vibhramaha 
smruti-bhranshãd-buddhi-nãsho bhudhi-nashãt-pranashyati 
A person thinking about the sense objects develops attachment toward them. 
From the attachment, desires develop; from the desires, anger develops; from 
anger, delusion develops; from delusion, confusion of the mind develops; from 
confusion of the mind, loss of buddhi develops; and as a result of the loss of 
buddhi, he perishes. 
 
 “These  words  spoken  by Shree   Krishna   Bhagvãn are   universal 
principles.    When  the chitt is  attracted  to vishays,  no  matter  how 
intelligent  a  person  may  be,  his buddhi becomes  unstable  and  he 
becomes   like   an   animal.      Therefore, moh is   generated   due   to 
attachment to the vishays. 
 
1.9
 “Now, if a person  who  wishes  to  detach  his chitt from  those vishays, 
he  should  firstly  strengthen  his  knowledge  of  the ãtmã – ‘I am the 
ãtmã, not this body’.    Secondly,  he  should  understand  the  nature  of 
how  the  universe  is  created,  sustained,  and  destroyed.    Thirdly,  he 
should  thoroughly  understand  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn.    He  should 

GADHADÃ II 
- 425 - 
think, ‘The panch-vishays  have  been  created  by  Bhagvãn;  therefore, 
there must be much more bliss in Bhagvãn than there is in them.  How 
is  that?    Well,  sounds  contain  only  pleasures  related to  sounds;  the 
pleasures of the other four types of vishays cannot be found in sounds’.  
In the same way, only the pleasures of touch and no other vishays can 
be  found  in  touch.    Similarly,  only  the  pleasures  of  sight  exist  in 
sights.  The same applies for tastes and smells in that only their own 
pleasures  exist,  but  the  pleasures  of  all  the panch-vishays cannot  be 
experienced in just one vishay. 
 
1.10
 “On the other hand, in Bhagvãn’s svarup,  all  pleasures  exist  at  the 
same time.  Therefore, even if a bhakta only has darshan, he still feels 
totally  satisfied.    Similarly,  touch  and  other  types  of  contact  with 
Bhagvãn also make His bhaktas feel totally fulfilled.  Also, the worldly 
pleasures  related  to vishays are  all  perishable,  whereas  the  bliss 
related  to Bhagvãn is  everlasting.    Such  thoughts  of  the  greatness  of 
Bhagvãn should  be  strengthened.    So,  attachment  to  the vishays is 
eradicated through these three types of thoughts. 
 
1.11
 “When attachment to the vishays is  eradicated,  a  person  no  longer 
makes  distinctions  between  pleasant  and  unpleasant vishays – an 
ugly  woman  appears  the  same  as  a  beautiful  woman.    In  the  same 
way,  he  sees  everything – animals,  birds,  wood,  dung,  stones,  and 
gold – to be the same; he is not infatuated on seeing a pleasant object.  
This is how he views the panch-vishays; and no distinctions between 
pleasantness and unpleasantness remain in his mind.  A person who 
behaves like this is known to be free of moh.  Shree Krishna Bhagvãn 
has also mentioned this in the Geetã: 
 
sama-loshtãshma-kãnchanaha 
He who regards a lump of earth, a stone, and gold as equal, is said to be 
gunãtit. 
 
1.12
 “A person with such characteristics has realised Bhagvãn perfectly; 
and only he can be called an ekãntik bhakta.  He should be known to 

GADHADÃ II 
- 426 - 
have  qualities  like  that  of  a pati-vratã who  abides  by  the  vow  of 
fidelity, and only he should be known to possess gnãn.  Also, Bhagvãn 
becomes  pleased  upon  him.    Such  a bhakta is  extremely  dear  to 
Bhagvãn; that is why Bhagvãn has said in the Geetã: 
 
priyo hi gnãnino-tyartha-maham sa cha mama priyaha 
I am very dear to a person with gnãn, and he is dear to me. 
 
1.13
 “So, only such bhaktas of Bhagvãn, who  have  qualities  like  that  of  a 
pati-vratã,  are  extremely  dear  to Bhagvãn.    Moreover,  it  is  not  as  if 
such qualities  are  only  acquired  by  a  person  who  is  clever;  it  is 
acquired by all those who have an intense desire for them – just like 
in the world, naïve wives may be faithful, while shrewd wives may be 
unfaithful.  Therefore, it does not matter whether a person is shrewd 
or  naïve;  instead,  it  is  those  who  have  an  intense  desire  for kalyãn 
that keep the qualities of a pati-vratã and offer bhakti to Bhagvãn. 
 
1.14
 “The state in which a person views pleasant and unpleasant vishays 
as equal and becomes free of moh, cannot be attained in just one day.  
Such  an  achievement  cannot  be  accomplished  so  hastily;  only  a 
person  who  attempts  to  do  so  gradually  and  earnestly  accomplishes 
it.    Take  the  example  of  a  stone  placed  on  the  edge  of  a  water-well.  
Due to the constant drawing of water with a rope, after a long period 
of  time  that  rope  causes  a  groove  to form in  the  stone,  despite  the 
rope  being  soft.    Even  if  an  iron  chain  were  to  be  used  to  draw  the 
water,  such  a  groove  would  still  not form immediately.    Therefore, 
those  who  wish  to  strive  for kalyãn should  eradicate  attachment  to 
the vishays,  and  they should  not  become  frustrated  or  upset.   This  is 
also mentioned in the Geetã: 
 
anek-janma-sansiddh-stato yãti parãm gatim 
A yogi who has become siddh after many lives, attains Akshardhãm. 
 
1.15
 “Therefore,  a  person  should  think, ‘I  will  eradicate  as  much 
attachment to the vishays as is possible in this life, and if in the process, 

GADHADÃ II 
- 427 - 
some attachment still remains, then it can be eradicated in a future life.  
Moreover, since I am a bhakta of Bhagvãn, I do not desire to enter the 
cycle of births and deaths’.    In  this  way,  a bhakta should  remain 
courageous and continue to gradually uproot moh. 
 
1.16
 “As long as pleasant and unpleasant vishays do  not  appear  to  be 
equal, a bhakta of Bhagvãn is said to be in sãdhan-dashã.  When they 
do appear to be equal, that bhakta should be known to have attained 
siddh-dashã.  When a person abandons his attachment to vishays and 
attains siddh-dashã,  he  should  be  known  to  have  become  fulfilled.  
This  is  the  very  essence  of  all  the shãstras.    Furthermore,  this  talk 
which I have delivered before you is the fundamental principle of all 
the shãstras.    Therefore,  all bhaktas should  firmly  remember  it  in 
their lives.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 1 || 134 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 2 
Overcoming The Panch-Vishays 
 
2.1
 In the Samvat year 1877, on Shrãvan sud 3 [1
st
 August 1821], Swãmi 
Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a silken, square cushion in 
front of  the mandir of Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s 
darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A 
sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had 
gathered  before  Him.   Some of  the munis were  singing kirtans to  the 
accompaniment of a jhãnjh and mrudang. 
 
2.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Please stop singing as I wish to speak to 
you.”  Shreeji Mahãrãj continued, “A person who wishes to attain 
ultimate kalyãn and  hopes  to  become  a sãdhu like Nãrad and  the 
Sanakãdik, should think, ‘The jeev resides in the body; and the indriyas 
and  antah-karans have attached themselves to that jeev’.    They  have 

GADHADÃ II 
- 428 - 
also  attached  themselves  externally  to  the panch-vishays.    However, 
due  to  ignorance,  the jeev believes  those indriyas,  and  the antah-
karans to  be  its  own  form,  whereas  in  actual  fact,  it  is  distinct  from 
them.    The vishays are  also  distinct  from  the antah-karans,  but 
because  of  constant  association  with  them,  they  appear  to  have 
become one with the antah-karans. 
 
2.3
 “In fact, the desire to indulge in the vishays actually arises because of 
the indriyas,  not  because of  the antah-karans.  For example,  extreme 
heat or cold first comes into contact with the outer indriyas, and then 
enters the body via those indriyas.  In other words, it is not generated 
from  within;  it  is  generated  outside  and  then  enters  within.    In  the 
same way, desires for the panch-vishays are not initially generated in 
the antah-karans; the indriyas first come into contact with the vishays 
externally,  and  then  those vishays enter  the antah-karans.  To  give 
another  example,  when  an  ulcer  develops  externally  on  the  skin,  it 
can be soothed only by applying medication externally, not by merely 
hearing  talks.   Also, hunger  and  thirst  can  only  be relieved  by  eating 
and drinking, but not by merely talking about food and water.  In the 
same   way,   the   disease  (panch-vishays)   can   only   be   cured   when 
medication is applied externally. 
 
2.4
 “The method of applying that medication is as follows:  When a 
person’s skin touches a vishay,  like  women  and  other  objects,  that 
object ‘enters’ the antah-karans via  the  skin.    Then,  via  the antah-
karans, it ‘enters’ the jeev.    The vishay was  not  initially  generated 
from  within  the jeev or  from  the antah-karans.  In  fact,  all vishays 
which  currently  spring  forth  from  the antah-karans have  definitely 
‘entered’  from  outside  through  the indriyas – in  a  previous  life.  
Therefore,  the  medicine  for  eradicating  attachment  to  the vishays is 
as  follows:    A  person  should  refrain  from  touching  objects  like 
women and other tempting objects via the skin; he should not look at 
their  beauty  via  the  eyes,  nor  talk  about  them  using  the  tongue;  he 
should  not  listen  to  them  or  about  them  via  the  ears;  he  should  not 

GADHADÃ II 
- 429 - 
smell their fragrance through the nose.  Through the five indriyas, if a 
person firmly abstains from the vishays in this way, then the ‘flow’ of 
the vishays cannot  enter within  from outside.   For  example,  a  water-
well can only be cleaned when the small streamlets of water that flow 
into  the  well  are clogged from  their  entrance with cloth  rags.    In  the 
same way, by keeping control over the external indriyas, the external 
vishays cannot enter the antah-karans. 
 
2.5
 “A stomach illness can only be cured when medicine enters the 
stomach.  In the same way, the vishays that have already accumulated 
in  the antah-karans by  the  way  of  the indriyas should  be  eradicated 
by  thinking  of  his  own  self  as  the ãtmã.    He  should  think, ‘I am the 
ãtmã.      The   indriyas   and   the   antah-karans   have   absolutely   no 
relationship with me’.    With  such  firm  thinking,  by  seeing Bhagvãn’s 
murti in  that chaitanya (jeev),  and  through  the  bliss  of  the ãtmã,  he 
should  remain  fulfilled.    Take  the  example  of  a  water-well  that  is 
completely full of water.  The water in the well will prevent the flow 
of new water from entering the well.  However, if the well is emptied 
by drawing water from it, then new water from outside will enter it.  
Similarly,  through  the  bliss  of  the ãtmã,  a  person  should  remain 
fulfilled  within.    Externally,  he  should  obstruct  the ‘inflow’ of the 
vishays through  the indriyas.    This  is  the  only  definite  method  for 
overcoming  vicious  natures,  such  as kãm and krodh;  they  cannot  be 
overcome by upvãs alone.  So please remember this thought firmly in 
your lives.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 2 || 135 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 3 
The Rasik Path 
The Knowledge Of The Ãtmã 
 
3.1
 In the Samvat year 1878, on Shrãvan sud 4 [2
nd
 August 1821], Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  square  cushion  in  front 

GADHADÃ II 
- 430 - 
of the mandir of Shree Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of 
paramhans, as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered 
before  Him.    Some  of  the paramhans were  singing kirtans to  the 
accompaniment of a jhãnjh and mrudang. 
 
3.2
 Then,   with   a   gesture   of   His   eyes,   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   silenced   the 
audience and said, “Those of you who are senior paramhans,  please 
come to the front as I wish to speak to you.” 
 
3.3
 So   saying,   Shreeji   Mahãrãj  continued,  “For  those  who  worship 
Bhagvãn,  there  are  two  paths  that  lead  to  greatness,  and  there  are 
also two paths that lead to downfall, all of which I shall now explain.  
One  path  is  to  offer bhakti to Bhagvãn via  the rasik path,  and  the 
other path is knowledge of the ãtmã.  Both can lead to greatness, but 
both can also lead to downfall.  Of these, thousands have fallen from 
the rasik path,  with  only  a  few  attaining Bhagvãn.    Even  the  great 
ãchãryas have  encouraged  the  offering  of bhakti via  the rasik path.  
However,   many   have   been   ruined   by   it,   and   only   a   few   have 
benefited. 
 
3.4
 “The reason for this is that when Bhagvãn is described in a rasik way, 
Rãdhikãji and Lakshmiji,   along   with   their   companions,   are   also 
described   together   with Bhagvãn.      When   women   are   described, 
obviously  their  physical  features  are  also  described.    Then,  how  can 
the  mind  of  the  person  who  is  describing  them  possibly  remain 
undisturbed?  In fact, the nature of the indriyas is such that they only 
develop  affection  for  those vishays that  are  seductive.    No  woman  in 
all the loks possesses beauty that matches the beauty of Rãdhikãji or 
Lakshmiji,  nor is  there anyone  who has  such  a sweet  voice  as  theirs; 
even   the   fragrance   radiating   from   their   bodies   is   unrivalled.  
Therefore,  upon  seeing  or  hearing  about  such  beauty,  how  can  a 
person not become infatuated?  It is inevitable.  Even if a person’s 
mind  is  only  slightly  disturbed,  he  still  falls  from  the  path  of kalyãn.  

GADHADÃ II 
- 431 - 
Therefore,  all  of  this  proves  to  be  a  great  obstacle  for  those  who 
worship Bhagvãn via the rasik path. 
 
3.5
 “Now, brahm-gnãn (knowledge of the ãtmã) can also give rise to the 
following  incorrect  understanding:   brahm itself  assumes  the svarup 
of Prakruti-Purush.    Then,  that brahm itself  assumes  the svarup of 
Brahmã, Vishnu,  and Shiv.    Thereafter, brahm assumes  the sthãvar 
and jangam svarups of  creation.    Subsequently, brahm also  becomes 
the jeevs residing in those sthãvar and jangam svarups of creation.  By 
misunderstanding brahm-gnãn in this way, a person then believes his 
own jeev to be Bhagvãn, which causes him to betray his upãsanã.  As 
a  result,  he  also  falls  from  the  path  of Bhagvãn.    So,  in  the  path  of 
brahm-gnãn, such a betrayal of his upãsanã is a major obstacle.  This 
is  because  the  very Bhagvãn who  is  to  be understood  as  the  cause 
and master of everything has been insulted.  Therefore, a person with 
this understanding should also be known to have fallen from the path 
of kalyãn. 
 
3.6
 “Now, while these two paths do lead to kalyãn,  the  obstacles  along 
the way are also extremely damaging.  So, what should a person who 
desires kalyãn do?  Please answer this question.” 
 
3.7
 All the paramhans then began to think, but no one was able to supply 
a suitable answer. 
 
3.8
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “The answer to the question is as follows:  
A person’s mind does not become infatuated on seeing his own 
mother, sister, or daughter, even if they are very beautiful.  Moreover, 
even though he may talk with them, or even touch them, his mind is 
not  even  slightly  infatuated.    In  the  same  way,  if  a  person  were  to 
consider  all  female bhaktas of Bhagvãn as  his own  mother,  sister,  or 
daughter, then infatuation would not arise in any way at all.  Then, by 
worshipping Bhagvãn via the rasik path, he would attain kalyãn. 
 
3.9
 “However, when a person does not have such understanding, and has 
lustful thoughts on seeing some great female bhaktas of Bhagvãn, his 

GADHADÃ II 
- 432 - 
character  becomes  extremely  flawed.    Furthermore,  the  flaw  arising 
from  lustfully  looking  at  other  women  is  eradicated  by  having  the 
darshan of  a bhakta of Bhagvãn.    However,  the shãstras mention  no 
method  of  eradicating  the  flaw  arising  from  lustfully  looking  at  a 
bhakta of Bhagvãn.  The same applies for a female who look at a male 
bhakta of Bhagvãn and  has  lustful  thoughts;  they  too  can  never  be 
redeemed of that sin.  This is described in the following verse:  
 
anya-kshetre krutam pãpam tirth-kshetre vina-shyati 
tirth-kshetre krutam pãpam vajra-lepo bhavi-shyati 
Sins committed elsewhere are destroyed at a place of pilgrimage, 
but sins committed at a place of pilgrimage are as though etched in iron. 
 
 “The verse means:  ‘Sins committed elsewhere can be removed by 
going  to  Bhagvãn  or  a  bhakta  of  Bhagvãn.    However,  if  a  person 
commits a sin before Bhagvãn or His bhakta, then it is like committing 
a sin at a place of pilgrimage; it becomes irredeemable, as if etched in 
iron’.    Therefore,  a  person  who  wishes  to  worship Bhagvãn via  the 
rasik path, should keep his mind pure, as I have explained. 
 
3.10
 “Now, a person on the path of brahm-gnãn,  should  understand  that 
brahm is  not  subject  to  change  and  is  indivisible.    Therefore,  it  does 
not  undergo  change,  and  it  cannot  be  divided.    When  that brahm is 
equated  with  all svarups,  it  is  because  that brahm is  the  cause  of 
Prakruti-Purush,  and  the  cause of  all.    It  is  their  supporter,  and  it 
pervades all through its antaryãmi powers.  Furthermore, that which 
is  the  cause,  the  supporter,  and  which  pervades  everything,  cannot 
be  distinct  from  its  effect.    It  is  in  reference  to  this  context  that  the 
shãstras equate that brahm with all forms.  However, a person should 
not  believe  that brahm itself  undergoes  change  and  assumes  the 
forms of all sthãvar and jangam beings. 
 
3.11
 “Also, greater than that brahm is Parbrahm  Purushottam  Nãrãyan, 
who  is  distinct  from brahm,  and  is  the  cause,  the  supporter,  and  the 
controller   of brahm.      With   this   understanding,   a   person   should 

GADHADÃ II 
- 433 - 
develop oneness with his jeevãtmã and with that brahm, and worship 
Bhagvãn while  maintaining  a  master-servant  relationship  with  Him.  
With this understanding, brahm-gnãn also becomes an unobstructed 
path to attaining Akshardhãm.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 3 || 136 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 4 
The Loss Of Dharma And Bhakti  
 
4.1
 In  the Samvat year  1878,  on Shrãvan sud 5[3
rd
 August  1821],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  the  veranda  outside  the 
west-facing medi in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was 
dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered  before  Him.    Some  of 
the paramhans were   singing kirtans in   the malãr rãg to   the 
accompaniment of a dukad, sarodã, and satãr. 
 
4.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Please stop the singing, and let us now 
talk about Bhagvãn.” 
 
4.3
 The paramhans responded, “Very well, Mahãrãj.” 
 
4.4
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Suppose a person, who follows dharma 
as  prescribed  in  the shãstras and  also  offers bhakti to Bhagvãn,  is 
faced with such unpleasant circumstances that if he tries to maintain 
bhakti,  he  is  forced  to  lapse  in  his  observance  of dharma,  and  if  he 
tries  to  maintain  his  observance  of dharma,  then  he  is  forced  to 
abandon bhakti.  In such a case, which should he maintain, and which 
should he abandon?” 
 
4.5
 Brahmãnand Swãmi replied, “If Bhagvãn is  pleased  by  upholding 
bhakti,   then bhakti should   be   upheld;   and   if   He   is   pleased   by 
upholding dharma, then dharma should be upheld.” 

GADHADÃ II 
- 434 - 
4.6
 Hearing this, Shreeji Mahãrãj countered, “For those who have found 
pratyaksha Bhagvãn,  it  is  of  course  appropriate  for  them  to  do  only 
that  which  pleases Bhagvãn.    But,  what  should  a  person  do  when 
Bhagvãn is not pratyaksha?” 
 
4.7
 Muktãnand  Swãmi  attempted  to  answer,  but  he  was  unable  to  do so 
satisfactorily. 
 
4.8
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  said,  “If  a  person  faces  unpleasant 
circumstances  when Bhagvãn is  not pratyaksha and  there  is  no  one 
else left to turn to, if he constantly thinks only about Bhagvãn, he will 
not fall from the path of Bhagvãn.” 
 
4.9
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  another  question,  “A  person  who 
thoroughly  understands  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn feels, ‘No matter 
how  many  sins  a  person  may  have  committed,  if  he  merely  utters  the 
name of Bhagvãn even once, all of his sins will be burnt to ashes’.  What 
understanding  should  a  person  with  this  belief  develop,  so  that  he 
never falters from the observance of dharma?” 
 
4.10
 Again, Muktãnand Swãmi attempted to answer, but was unable to do 
so satisfactorily. 
 
4.11
 So, replying to His own question, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “A person who 
thoroughly  realises Bhagvãn’s greatness  can  still  abide  by dharma if 
he develops the following understanding:  ‘I want to constantly think 
about Bhagvãn and become an ekãntik bhakta.  However, if my vrutti is 
drawn towards vicious natures, such as kãm, krodh, and lobh, then that 
will  be  an  obstruction in my thoughts of Bhagvãn’.  Realising  this,  he 
remains  extremely  cautious  of  treading  the  wrong  path.    As  a  result, 
he would never do anything related to adharma.  If a person has this 
understanding,    then    even    though    he    thoroughly    realises    the 
greatness  of Bhagvãn,  he  would  never  falter  in  his  observance  of 
dharma. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 435 - 
4.12
 “Indeed, it is not a small deed  to  be  able  to  think  about Bhagvãn 
constantly;  if  a  person  were  to  leave  his  body  while  thinking  about 
Bhagvãn, he would attain Akshardhãm.” 
 
4.13
 Then, Brahmãnand Swãmi asked, “We do realise this, yet we still 
cannot constantly think about Bhagvãn.  What is the reason for this?” 
 
4.14
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “First of all, to be able to constantly think 
about Bhagvãn,  a  person  needs shraddhã.    If he  does  not  have  such 
shraddhã,  it  implies  that  there  is  a  deficiency  in  realising Bhagvãn’s 
greatness.  When there is this deficiency, it suggests that there is also 
a deficiency in his nishchay in the svarup of Bhagvãn.  So, if a person 
realises the greatness of Bhagvãn and also has shraddhã, then he will 
be able to constantly think about Bhagvãn. 
 
4.15
 “Furthermore, Bhagvãn’s greatness should be understood as follows:  
Bhagvãn, who is greater than Prakruti-Purush, is the very same when 
he  enters  them;  He  still  retains  His divya powers.    Even  after  He 
enters  the  entities  evolved  from Prakruti-Purush,  like  the brahmãnd, 
He  retains  the  very  same  powers;  but,  in  no  way  do  traces  of Mãyã 
affect Bhagvãn’s murti.  For example, consider the difference between 
gold and other metals.  When they are buried together in the ground 
for  a  long  period  of  time,  all  the  metals  other  than  the  gold  will 
decompose  into  the  dirt  surrounding  them.    In  comparison,  the 
longer the gold stays in the ground, the more valuable it becomes, as 
it does not decompose in any way. 
 
4.16
 “Similarly, Bhagvãn, devs such as Brahmã and others, or other munis 
are  not  all  the  same.    This  is  because  when  they  come  into  contact 
with  dirt  (vishays),  then  all  except Bhagvãn become  engrossed  in 
those vishays,  regardless  of  how  great  they  may  be.    Moreover, 
although Bhagvãn seems  to  be  like  a  human,  there  is  no  worldly 
object capable of affecting Him.  Regardless of how attractive a vishay 
may  be,  He  is  never  tempted  by  it.    This  is  the alokik power  of 

GADHADÃ II 
- 436 - 
Bhagvãn.    If  a  person  realises  this  greatness,  he  will  be  able  to 
constantly think about Bhagvãn. 
 
4.17
 “However, as long as a bhakta is  attracted  to vishays,  he  has  not 
realised Bhagvãn’s alokik greatness at all.  For example, Bhagvãn said 
to Uddhavji, ‘O Uddhav!  You are not even slightly lesser than me’.  This 
was  because  Uddhavji  had  realised Bhagvãn’s alokik greatness,  and 
therefore was not attracted by the panch-vishays. 
 
4.18
 “For  a  person  who  realises  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn,  to  rule  a 
kingdom or to have to beg for food, are both equivalent.  He also feels 
the same towards a young girl, a 16-year-old girl, and an 80-year old 
woman.    In  fact,  he  views  all  the  attractive  and  repulsive  objects  in 
this  world  as  being  equal;  he  does  not  get  tempted  by  an attractive 
object  as  a  moth  does  by  a  lamp.    In  fact,  he  is  not  tempted  by  any 
object   except   for Bhagvãn;   he   is  only   attracted   to   the murti of 
Bhagvãn.    A bhakta who  behaves  in  this  way,  never  becomes  bound 
by vishays, regardless of how tempting they may be. 
 
4.19
 “However, if a person has not understood this key principle, then it 
would  be  very  difficult  for  him  to  detach  his  mind  from  even  a  torn 
waistcloth  or  a  water-pot.    Therefore,  without  realising Bhagvãn’s 
greatness  in  this  way,  even  if  a  person  makes  an  effort  in  a  million 
other  ways,  he  will  still  not  be  able  to  constantly  think  about  the 
murti of Bhagvãn.    Only  a  person  who  realises  the  greatness  of 
Bhagvãn is able to constantly think about Him.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 4 || 137 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 5 
Fidelity And Courage 
 
5.1
 In  the Samvat year  1878,  on Shrãvan sud 7[5
th
 August  1821], Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  square  cushion  which 

GADHADÃ II 
- 437 - 
had  been  placed  on  the  platform  in  front  of  the mandir of Shree 
Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was 
dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered  before  Him.    Some  of 
the paramhans were  singing kirtans to  the  accompaniment  of  a 
mrudang. 
 
5.2
 Then, with a gesture of His eyes, Shreeji Mahãrãj stopped the kirtans 
and said, “Everyone please listen, as I wish to speak.  A bhakta of 
Bhagvãn should  firstly  maintain pati vratã,  and  secondly  maintain 
courage.    For  example,  consider  a pati-vratã wife  who  abides  by  the 
vow  of  fidelity.    Even  if  her  husband  is  old,  sick,  poor,  or  ugly,  the 
mind  of  that pati-vratã wife  would  never  sway  upon  seeing  the 
qualities  of  another  man.  Even if a beggar’s wife, who observes this 
vow, were to see a great king, her mind would not waver.  In a similar 
way,  a bhakta of Bhagvãn should  follow  the  vow  of pati vratã with 
Bhagvãn. 
 
5.3
 “Furthermore, if someone were to speak ill of a woman’s husband, 
then she will not remain timid and quiet.  Instead, she will reply very 
courageously.    In  this  way,  a bhakta of Bhagvãn should  not  become 
suppressed by evil people; he should be courageous. 
 
5.4
 “It  is  generally said that a sãdhu should  view  everyone  equally.  
However,  this  is  not  the  principle  of  the shãstras,  as bhaktas like 
Nãrad, the Sanakãdik, Dhruv, and Prahlãd, have taken the side of only 
Bhagvãn and His bhaktas; they have never taken the side of vimukhs.  
A person who does side with a vimukh, will himself definitely become 
a vimukh as well, either in this life or in the next.  Therefore, a bhakta 
of Bhagvãn should   certainly   side   with Bhagvãn’s  bhaktas and 
abandon  the  side  of vimukhs.    Please  firmly  remember  this  talk  of 
mine.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 5 || 138 || 

GADHADÃ II 
- 438 - 
Gadhadã II – 6 
Vidhi And Nishedh 
The Nature Of The Chitt 
 
6.1
 In the Samvat year 1878, on Shrãvan sud 8 [6
th
 August 1821], Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Swãmi  was  sitting  on  a  square  platform  in  front 
of the mandir of Shree Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of 
paramhans, as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered 
before  Him.    Some  of  the paramhans were  singing kirtans to  the 
accompaniment of a mrudang. 
 
6.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Please stop the singing and lets us now 
talk about Bhagvãn.” 
 
6.3
 Then, all the munis sat with their hands folded.  Shreeji Mahãrãj then 
continued, “In this world, there are many people who are like nãstiks.  
They believe, ‘Water from the Gangã and other water seems the same; 
shãligrãms and other stones seem the same; tulsi and other trees seem 
the  same;  a  brãhman  and  a  shudra  seem  equal;  food  which  is  the 
prasãd of Bhagvãn and other food seems the same; to do upvãs on the 
day  of  Ekãdashi  and  to  go  hungry  on  any  other  day  seems  the  same; 
and  a  sãdhu  and  a  non-sãdhu  also  seem  the  same.    Despite  this,  why 
have  those  great  men  made  distinctions  in  the form of  vidhi  and 
nishedh in the shãstras?’  This  is  what  is  said  by  people  with  evil 
minds.  That is why I put this question to all of you sãdhus:  Are those 
distinctions,   in   the form of vidhi and nishedh prescribed  in   the 
shãstras by   great   men,   genuine   or   fictional?      May   the   junior 
paramhans answer this question.” 
 
6.4
 The  junior paramhans replied, “The distinctions in the form of vidhi 
and nishedh are indeed genuine.  If this were not so, how could there 
be  a  distinction  as  to  who  deserves  to  attain  Svarg-Lok  and  who 
deserves to attain Narak?” 

GADHADÃ II 
- 439 - 
6.5
 Hearing this, Shreeji Mahãrãj commented, “They are young, but they 
understand well.”  Shreeji Mahãrãj then elaborated upon the answer 
Himself.  “Whatever the great men of the past have prescribed in the 
shãstras is  genuine.    Take  the  example  of  a  wealthy  businessman.    If 
he  writes  a  cheque  to  pay  some  other  merchant,  then  although  it 
seems  that  the  piece  of  paper  is  not  worth  even  a  single  rupee,  it  is 
indeed  money.    Only  when  the  merchant  cashes  the  cheque  the 
businessman  had  signed,  does  the  merchant  subsequently  receive  a 
large sum of money from that very same cheque.  Similarly, although 
at  the  time  there  may  not  seem  to  be  any  benefit  in  following  the 
vidhi and nishedh, a person who does follow dharma by the ãgnã of a 
great sant,  ultimately  attains kalyãn – just  as  a  person  receives  cash 
from cheques. 
 
6.6
 “Moreover, a person who does not trust a cheque signed by a wealthy 
businessman  should  be  known  to  be  a  fool – because  he  does  not 
realise the wealth of that businessman.  Similarly, a person who does 
not  trust  the  words  of  great bhaktas,  such  as Nãrad,  the Sanakãdik, 
Vyãs, and Vãlmik, should be known as a nãstik and a great sinner. 
 
6.7
 “Furthermore, a person who has such a nãstik attitude  believes, 
‘What is the difference between Bhagvãn’s murti and other stones?  All 
stones are one and the same.  What is the difference between a married 
woman and an unmarried woman?  All women are equal.  What is the 
difference between a person’s wife, mother, or sister?  After all, they all 
look  alike.    In  fact,  even  all  the  avatãrs  of  Bhagvãn,  such  as  Rãm  and 
Krishna, look like humans.  Surely, the concept of them being greater or 
lesser has been created by man’s imagination.  But, what can we do?  
We  have  to  live  with  such  people,  so  we  have  to  agree  with  whatever 
they say.  Nevertheless, the vidhi and nishedh prescribed by the shãstras 
are definitely nonsense’.    This  is  the  understanding  that  sinners  such 
as the nãstiks have in their minds.  If a person hears such words from 
someone, then the listener should be known as a sinner and a nãstik; 
and  realising  him  to  be  an  outcast,  he  should  by  no  means  keep  his 
company.” 

GADHADÃ II 
- 440 - 
6.8
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  began  another  topic.    He  said, “The chitt of  all 
people is like honey, or like water saturated with sugar.  For example, 
if a fly or an ant were to fall into that honey or water saturated with 
sugar, it would become stuck in it.  Even if a person were to touch the 
honey  or  saturated water, it would stick to the person’s finger as 
well.    The  nature  of  the chitt is  similar  to  this;  it  sticks  to  whatever 
object it recalls.  In fact, the chitt even attaches itself to things that are 
utterly  insignificant,  such  as  stones,  or  rubbish,  or  dog  excrement – 
things  in  which  there  is  not  even  the  slightest  pleasure.    If  it  recalls 
such  useless  things,  it  will  then  also  think  about  them.    This  is  its 
sticky nature. 
 
6.9
 “Furthermore, just as the reflection of a great sãdhu will be seen in a 
large, glass  mirror  if  he  stands  before  it,  the  reflection  of  a  dog,  a 
donkey,  or  an  outcaste  will  also  be  seen  if  they  stand  before  it.  
Similarly,  the chitt is  extremely  pure;  it  can  visualise  whichever 
object   it   recalls,   regardless   of   whether   it   is   appealing   or   not.  
Therefore, a mumukshu should not think, ‘As I do not possess vairãgya, 
objects  such  as  women  and  other  attractive  vishays  develop  in  my 
chitt’.    In  actual  fact,  objects  develop  naturally  even  in  the chitt of  a 
person who does possess vairãgya.  Therefore, vairãgya or the lack of 
it is not the reason behind this.  Instead, the nature of the chitt is such 
that  whatever  it  recalls;  whether  it  is  good  or  bad,  the chitt thinks 
about.    When  it  thinks  about  an  object,  it  appears  just  as  it  would 
appear  in mirror.   That is  why  a  person  should  realise, ‘I am distinct 
from the chitt.  I am the ãtmã, the observer of the chitt’.  Realising this, 
he  should  not  become  frustrated  by  the  pure  and  impure  thoughts 
arising  in  the chitt.    Instead,  he  should  realise  himself  to  be  distinct 
from his chitt, engage in the worship of Bhagvãn, and always remain 
joyful.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 6 || 139 || 
 
 

GADHADÃ II 
- 441 - 
Gadhadã II – 7 
Eradicating Svabhãvs 
 
7.1
 In  the Samvat year  1878,  on  the  night  of Shrãvan sud 11  [9
th
 August 
1821],  Swãmi  Shree Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  in  front  of  the 
mandir of Shree   Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in  Dãdã  Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of 
paramhans, as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered 
before Him. 
 
7.2
 Then,  Muktãnand  Swãmi  asked  Shreeji  Mahãrãj,  “A bhakta of 
Bhagvãn decides in his mind, ‘I do not want to retain a single svabhãv 
which  may  obstruct  me  in  worshipping  Bhagvãn’.        However, 
inappropriate svabhãvs still  remain  within  him.    What  is  the  reason 
for this?” 
 
7.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If a person has a deficiency of vairãgya, then 
even if he has the shraddhã to eradicate his svabhãvs, they will not be 
eradicated.    For  example,  a  poor  man  may  wish  for  lots  of  delicious 
food  and  lavish  clothes,  but  how  can  he  acquire  them?    Similarly,  a 
person  who  lacks vairãgya may  wish  in  his  heart  to  acquire  the 
qualities of a sãdhu, but it is very difficult for him to do so.” 
 
7.4
 Muktãnand  Swãmi  then  asked,  “If  a  person  does  not  possess 
vairãgya,  what  method  should  he  adopt  to  eradicate  those  vicious 
natures?” 
 
7.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If a person lacks vairãgya,  but  intensely 
serves  a  great sant,  and  obeys  the ãgnã of Bhagvãn,  then Bhagvãn 
will  look  upon  him  with  an  eye  of  compassion,  and  feel, ‘This poor 
man  lacks  vairãgya;  and  the  vicious  natures,  like  kãm  and  krodh,  are 
harassing  him  very  much.    So,  may  all  of  those  vicious  natures  be 
eradicated’.    As  a  result,  they  will  be  eradicated  immediately.    In 
comparison,  if  he  were  to  attempt  other  methods,  those svabhãvs 

GADHADÃ II 
- 442 - 
may  be  eradicated,  but  only  after  a  great  deal  of  time  and  effort – 
either  in  this  life  or  in  later  lives.    If  such  vicious  natures  are 
eradicated  instantly,  then  it  should  be  known  that  they  have  been 
eradicated by the grace of Bhagvãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 7 || 140 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 8 
Ekãdashi 
Gnãn-Yagna 
Antar-Drashti 
 
8.1
 In the Samvat year 1878, in the early morning of Shrãvan sud 12 [10
th
 
August  1821],  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a 
square  cushion  in  front  of  the mandir of Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in 
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was dressed entirely in white 
clothes.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various 
places,  had  gathered  before  Him.    Some  of  the paramhans were 
singing kirtans to the accompaniment of a mrudang. 
 
8.2
 Then,  addressing  the sãdhus, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “A person should 
keep the Ekãdashi vrat because of the following story:  Once, Bhagvãn 
was  sleeping  with  his  ten indriyas and  the  mind  (eleventh indriya) 
drawn  inwards.    At  that  time,  Mur-Dãnav,  the  son  of  Nãdi-Jandh, 
came  to  do  battle  with Bhagvãn.    A  young  woman  was  then  created 
from  the  divine  light  of Bhagvãn’s eleven indriyas.    Seeing  her,  Mur-
Dãnav proposed to her, ‘Please marry me’.  The young woman replied, 
‘I have taken a vow that I will only marry the person who defeats me in 
a battle’.  This resulted in a battle between Mur-Dãnav and the young 
woman, in which the young woman cut off Mur-Dãnav’s head with a 
sword.   Bhagvãn was  pleased  with  her  and  said, ‘Ask for a vardãn’.  
The  young  woman  requested, ‘On my day of vrat, no one should eat 
grains.  Furthermore, as I was born from the divine light of your eleven 
indriyas,  my  name  is  Ekãdashi.    As  I  am  a  tyãgi,  on  my  day  of  vrat,  no 
one should indulge in any of the vishays related to the eleven indriyas, 

GADHADÃ II 
- 443 - 
which includes the mind’.    Hearing Ekãdashi’s wish, Bhagvãn granted 
her that vardãn.  This is the story as it is narrated in the Purãns. 
 
8.3
 “The Dharma-Shãstras  also  state:   ‘The Ekãdashi vrat should be kept.  
On  that  day,  a  person  should  not  allow  impure  thoughts,  such  as  kãm, 
krodh,  and  lobh,  to  arise  in  the  mind;  nor  should  he  physically  engage 
in any immoral activities’.    This  is  what  the shãstras prescribe.    In 
agreement with those shãstras, I also say that on the day of Ekãdashi, 
a person should not merely do upvãs, but he should also abandon the 
‘food’ of the  eleven indriyas.    Only  then  can  the Ekãdashi vrat be 
considered true; without that, it should be known as mere upvãs. 
 
8.4
 “Just as the prãns have  their  diet  (food),  the  ears  have  a  diet  of 
sounds, the eyes have a diet of sights, the tongue has a diet of tastes, 
the nose has a diet of smells, and the mind has a diet of thoughts and 
desires.  In this way, the eleven indriyas have their diets.  To give up 
all  these  is  called Ekãdashi  vrat.    However,  to  allow  the  eleven 
indriyas to  roam  freely  along  the  path  of  immorality  and  indulge  in 
their  ‘foods’  is  not  truly Ekãdashi according   to   the shãstras.  
Therefore, when keeping an Ekãdashi vrat, the eleven indriyas should 
not be allowed their ‘foods’.  As this vrat arrives  once  every  fifteen 
days, a person should definitely make a point of keeping it.  In return, 
Bhagvãn will become pleased.  Without this, merely doing upvãs does 
not please Him. 
 
8.5
 “The residents of Shvet-Dvip,  who  are  called niranna-muktas,  are 
continuously keeping this vrat, and they never allow it to be broken.  
That is precisely why they are called niranna muktas.  We too should 
have such aspirations as, ‘I want to become like those niranna-muktas 
in Shvet-Dvip’.  However, a person should not lose courage.  Only if he 
keeps   courage   and   keeps the Ekãdashi   vrat in   the   way   I   have 
mentioned,  listens  to kathãs and kirtans of Bhagvãn,  and  also  stays 
awake  at  night,  is  the vrat considered  to  have  been  kept  properly.  
This  is  the  very  definition  of  the Ekãdashi vrat as  mentioned  in  the 
shãstras.” 

GADHADÃ II 
- 444 - 
8.6
 Having  said  this,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  became  silent.    The sãdhus then 
began to sing kirtans. 
 
8.7
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj again said, “When Brahmã carried out the very 
first  creation,  he  told  all  the  people, ‘You should all perform yagnas.  
Through  them  you will  attain  all  the  purushãrths,  and  the  process  of 
creation   will   also   flourish.      Therefore,   be   sure   to   perform   these 
sacrifices’.   Brahmã then  demonstrated  the  many  different  types  of 
yagnas, along  with  their  rituals,  as  described  in  the  Veds.    To  those 
who  had  adopted  the  path  of pravrutti, Brahmã demonstrated  the 
rãjasi and tãmasi yagnas.    To  those  who  had  adopted  the  path  of 
nivrutti,  he  demonstrated sãttvik yagnas.  These yagnas have  also 
been  described  by Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn in  the  Bhagvad  Geetã.  
Since we have adopted the path of nivrutti, we should perform sãttvik 
yagnas, not rãjasi or tãmasi yagnas in which animals are slaughtered. 
 
8.8
 “A  person  can  perform  a sãttvik yagna by  withdrawing  the  ten 
indriyas and  the  mind  (the  eleventh indriya)  from whichever vishays 
they  have  become  attached  to,  and  then  offering  them  into brahm-
agni.    This  is  called  a yog-yagna.    By  continuously  making  these 
offerings, Parbrahm Shree Purushottam incarnates  Himself  with  the 
brahm-svarup self  of  the  person  who  performs  a yoga-yagna,  just  as 
Bhagvãn grants darshan to  the  performer  of  a yagna.  In  fact,  this  is 
the reward of the yog-yagna. 
 
8.9
 “Also, when a bhakta of Bhagvãn engages in antar-drashti, it is called 
a gnãn-yagna.    Someone  may ask, ‘What  is  antar-drashti?’  The 
answer is:  To direct a person’s internal or external vrutti towards 
the murti of Bhagvãn is itself antar-drashti.  Without doing this, even 
if a person is sitting and seemingly engaged in antar-drashti, it is still 
bãhya-drashti.  Therefore, physical activities related to Bhagvãn, such 
as having the darshan of Bhagvãn, performing His pujã or engaging in 
kathã and kirtans of Bhagvãn,  are  all  forms  of antar-drashti.    All  of 
these  are  aspects  of  a gnãn-yagna.    In  addition, to  see  that murti of 

GADHADÃ II 
- 445 - 
Bhagvãn within the heart, to perform its pujã, and to bow before it, is 
also antar-drashti, and they are also aspects of a gnãn-yagna.  For this 
reason,   all satsangis are   continuously   performing gnãn-yagna.  
However,  it  is  by  the  wish of Bhagvãn that  some  attain samãdhi and 
others do not.  Sometimes it could also be that the bhakta himself has 
some sort of deficiency. 
 
8.10
 “There are foolish people who say, ‘Do not sing kirtans which describe 
the gopis; sing only nirgun kirtans’.    Those  same  fools  claim  that  a 
person  who  roams  around  naked  is nirgun.    But,  if  a  person  could 
become nirgun by  merely  walking  around  naked,  then  even  dogs, 
donkeys,  and  other  animals  would  be  called nirgun.    This  is  the 
understanding of fools. 
 
8.11
 “In comparison,  a bhakta possessing gnãn understands  that  only  the 
svarup Bhagvãn is nirgun,  and  all  those  who  have  some  relation  to 
Bhagvãn are followers of the nirgun path.  Furthermore, any kathã or 
kirtan associated  with Bhagvãn is  also  considered nirgun.    However, 
kathã or kirtan which are not associated with Bhagvãn possess mãyik 
qualities,  and  should  be  considered  to  be sagun.    So,  if  a  person  has 
not  been  graced  with  the  attainment  of Bhagvãn,  then  even  if  he 
walks  around  naked,  he  cannot  be  called nirgun;  whereas  even  if  a 
grahastha has  been  graced  with  the  attainment  of Bhagvãn,  he  can 
still be called nirgun – as can a tyãgi.’  Therefore, the path to attaining 
Bhagvãn is itself the nirgun path, and all activities related to Bhagvãn 
are therefore also nirgun. 
 
8.12
 “As for a person who has come into contact with Bhagvãn, there is no 
limit to his good fortune.  However, such a relationship with Bhagvãn 
is  not  the  result  of  rewards  from  one  life  alone.    That  is  why Shree 
Krishna Bhagvãn has stated in the Bhagvad Geetã: 
 
anek-janma-sansiddh-stato yãti parãm gatim 
A yogi who has become siddh after many lives, attains Akshardhãm. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 446 - 
 “The meaning of this shlok is:   ‘A person becomes a yogi and attains 
Akshardhãm  after  the  good  deeds  of  many  lives  have accumulated’.  
What  is  this Akshardhãm?    Well,  the  attainment  of  the pratyaksha 
Bhagvãn is itself Akshardhãm. 
 
8.13
 “Shree Krishna Bhagvãn has also said: 
 
mamai-vãnsho jeev-loke jeev-bhootaha sanãtanaha 
manaha-shashthã-neendriyãni prakruti-sthãni karshati 
 
 “This shlok means:   ‘In this world, those jeevs who are bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn  withdraw  their  mind  and  five  gnãn-indriyas  away  from  the 
panch-vishays  and  keep  them  suppressed.    On  the  other  hand,  those 
who  are  not  bhaktas  of  Bhagvãn  are  drawn  by  their  indriyas  and  are 
taken where the indriyas wish to go’.  As we are not led astray by our 
indriyas, we should realise ourselves to be bhaktas of Bhagvãn.  With 
this  understanding,  we  should  remain  joyful,  should  engage  in  the 
worship of Bhagvãn, and should offer all the vruttis of our indriyas to 
Bhagvãn.  We should continuously perform a gnãn-yagna in this way. 
 
8.14
 “Without performing such yagnas,  there  is  no  way  to  attain kalyãn.  
The  four  Veds,  the  Sãnkhya shãstras,  the  Yog shãstras,  the  Dharma-
Shãstras,  the  eighteen  Purãns,  the  Mahãbhãrat,  the  Rãmãyan,  the 
Nãrad  Panch-Rãtra,  and  all  other shãstras,  share  the  principles  that 
kalyãn cannot be attained without performing yagnas. 
 
8.15
 “It  is  also  my ãgnã that  all paramhans and  all satsangis should 
continue  performing  a gnãn-yagna.    While  performing  a gnãn-yagna 
in  this  way,  a  person  ultimately  has  the  divine darshan of Parbrahm 
within his own self, which is brahm.  This is the reward of the gnãn-
yagna.    The  highest  point  of  the gnãn-yagna ritual  is  when  a  person 
becomes like a niranna-mukta of Shvet-Dvip.  As long as a person has 
not  attained  this  state,  he  should  realise  that  the gnãn-yagna is 
incomplete.    In  fact,  he should  have  a  strong  desire  to  become  like  a 
niranna-mukta.    In  the  process,  he  should  not  lose  faith,  and  he 

GADHADÃ II 
- 447 - 
should  not  consider  himself  to  be  unfulfilled.    Since  he  has  been 
graced with the attainment of Bhagvãn, he should consider himself to 
be absolutely fulfilled, and he should attentively continue performing 
the gnãn-yagna.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 8 || 141 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 9 
Never Insult The Svarup Of Bhagvãn 
 
9.1
 In  the Samvat year  1878,  on Shrãvan sud 14  [12
th
 August  1821], 
Swãmi Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a square cushion in 
front  of  the mandir of Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s 
darbãr in Gadhadã.  Ãnandãnand Swãmi had just performed His pujã.  
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  wearing  a  red survãl and dagli made  from 
kinkhãb.  He had tied an orange reto with a golden border around His 
head,  and  had  tied  an  embroidered shelu around  His  waist.    On  His 
shoulder  was  a  sky-blue  coloured reto.    Several rãkhadis were  tied 
around  His  wrist.    A sabhã of munis, as  well  as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
9.2
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi suggested, “Let us sing kirtans.” 
 
9.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Let us talk about Bhagvãn.”  He then continued, 
“The path of gnãn should be understood in a way that does not cause 
a  person  to  criticise  the svarup of Bhagvãn in  any  way.    In  fact,  a 
person  should  not  worry  if  at  some  time  or  other  he  has  disobeyed 
Bhagvãn’s ãgnãs; but he should never criticise the svarup of Bhagvãn.  
If  he  does  disobey Bhagvãn’s ãgnãs,  then  he  can  still  be  freed  from 
that  sin  by  praying  to Bhagvãn.    However,  there  are  no  means  of 
release   for   a   person   who   has   criticised   the svarup of Bhagvãn.  
Therefore, a person who is wise should certainly abide by Bhagvãn’s 
ãgnãs to  the  best  of his  ability.    However,  he  should  also  intensely 
maintain  the  strength  of  belief  in Bhagvãn’s svarup: ‘I have attained 

GADHADÃ II 
- 448 - 
the very svarup of Bhagvãn who reigns supreme, who forever possesses 
a divya svarup, and who is the ‘avatãri’ – the  cause of  all the  avatãrs’.  
If a person realises this, then even if he may have left satsang, his love 
for Bhagvãn’s svarup will not diminish.  In fact, even though he is out 
of satsang at   present,   when   he   leaves   his   body,   he   will   go   to 
Bhagvãn’s Akshardhãm and stay near Bhagvãn. 
 
9.4
 “On the other hand, a person may be in satsang, and he may even be 
abiding by the ãgnãs prescribed in the shãstras.  However, if his belief 
of Bhagvãn is not firm, then when he leaves his body, he will either go 
to the lok of Brahmã or to the lok of some other dev; but he will not go 
to  the dhãm of Purushottam Bhagvãn.    Therefore,  a  person  should 
believe that the pratyaksha Bhagvãn that he has attained possesses a 
divya svarup,  and  is  the ‘avatãri’ – the  cause  of  all  the avatãrs.  
However,  if  a  person  does  not  have  this  belief,  and  instead  believes 
Bhagvãn to be nirãkãr or like the other avatãrs, then that is regarded 
as committing blasphemy against Bhagvãn. 
 
9.5
 “Now, consider the following:  Arjun’s spiritual strength was based 
on  his  belief  of Bhagvãn, whereas Yudhishthir’s source of strength 
was   his   faith   in   the   words   of   the shãstras.      Then,   when   the 
Mahãbhãrat war was fought, Shree Krishna Bhagvãn said to Arjun: 
 
sarva-dharmãn-parityajya mãm-ekam sharanam vraja 
aham tvam sarva-pãpebhyo mokshayi-shyãmi mã shuchaha 
 
 “The meaning of this shlok is, ‘O Arjun!  Abandon all the various types 
of dharma and surrender only to me.  I shall deliver you from all sins, so 
do  not grieve’.    By  keeping  faith  in  these  words,  Arjun  never  became 
disheartened, despite committing countless misdeeds during the war.  
He  maintained  firm  faith  in Bhagvãn.    Conversely,  Yudhishthir  had 
not committed any sins, but because he had faith in the words of the 
shãstras, he felt, ‘I shall never attain kalyãn’.  Even when all the rushis, 
Vyãsji, and even Shree Krishna Bhagvãn Himself attempted to explain 
to him, still he did not abandon his guilt.  Yudhishthir only developed 

GADHADÃ II 
- 449 - 
some  faith  when Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn took  him  to  Bhishma  and 
had him listen to Bhishma’s kathã on the true meaning of the words 
of the shãstras.  However, he did not become totally free of doubt like 
Arjun.  Therefore, a person who is intelligent should maintain intense 
belief of the svarup of Bhagvãn. 
 
9.6
 “Even the slightest strength based on  the  belief  of Bhagvãn,  will 
protect a person from great dangers.  Shree Krishna Bhagvãn has also 
said,  
 
svalpa-mapyasya dharmasya trãyate mahato bhayãt 
  
 “This shlok means, ‘If a person has the slightest strength based on the 
belief  of  Bhagvãn,  it  will protect  him  from  great misfortune.    For 
example, when Arjun fought in the Mahãbhãrat war, he encountered 
many  types  of severe  dangers  in  the form of adharma.    However,  he 
was  spared  from  those  dangers  because  of  his  belief  of Bhagvãn.  
Therefore, only he can be called an ekãntik bhakta whose strength is 
based on the belief of Bhagvãn more than anything else; and only he 
can   be   called   a   perfect satsangi.      The   Shreemad   Bhãgvat   also 
mentions: ‘If a person strays from the dharma stated in the Shrutis and 
Smrutis,  he  should  not  worry.    However,  he  should  never  abandon  the 
refuge of Bhagvãn’. 
 
9.7
 “As a result, some may feel, ‘If we promote such talks, dharma will 
become irrelevant.’  However,  this  principle  is  not  intended  to  make 
dharma irrelevant;  its  purpose  is  as  follows:   Desh, kãl, kriyã, sang, 
mantras, shãstras, updesh, and devs,  can  be  of  two  types – pure  and 
impure.  Of these, if a person were to encounter the impure, and if as 
a result some difficulties were to arise, then if he has the firm belief of 
Bhagvãn, he would never fall from the path of kalyãn.  Conversely, if 
there is a deficiency in his belief of Bhagvãn, then whenever he falters 
from dharma,   he   would   feel, ‘I  am  destined  to  fall  into  Narak’.  
Therefore,  only  a  person  whose  strength  is  based  on  the  belief  of 
Bhagvãn is   a   loyal satsangi.      Without   this,   a   person   is   merely 

GADHADÃ II 
- 450 - 
appreciative of satsang.  Even the shãstras mention that only a person 
who  firmly  maintains  the  belief  of Bhagvãn is  called  an ekãntik 
bhakta.” 
 
9.8
  “Also,  if Nãrad,  the Sanakãdik,  and  the devs,  were  to  hear  the  talks 
being presently delivered in satsang, they would say, ‘We have never 
heard such talks before, and we shall never hear them again’.    These 
talks can be described as: 
 
na bhooto na bhavishyati 
Never before have there been, and never again will there be. 
 
“Although these talks are extremely small, even a person of average 
intelligence   can   understand   them.      It   is   as   if   these   talks   are 
personified.    Therefore,  there  is  no  limit  to  the  rewards  of  a  person 
who, at this present time, has a belief of satsang.  Realising this, those 
who  are satsangis  should  consider  themselves  to  be  totally  fulfilled.  
Moreover, a person who has profound love for Bhagvãn, regardless of 
whether he understands this talk, has nothing left to do.  On the other 
hand, if a person does not have such profound love for Bhagvãn, then 
he  should  definitely  realise  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn.    Therefore,  a 
person  who  is  wise  should  think  about  this  talk,  understand  it,  and 
then  take  extremely  firm  refuge  in Bhagvãn.    This  principle  alone  is 
the very essence of all essences.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 9 || 142 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 10 
Nishchay In Bhagvãn 
 
10.1
 In the Samvat year 1878, on Shrãvan vad 3 [16
th
 August 1821], Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  arrived  at  Lakshmi-Vãdi  on  horseback 
from Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He then sat facing north on 
the  square  platform  under  a  mango  tree  in  the  middle  of  a  field  of 

GADHADÃ II 
- 451 - 
flowers.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of 
paramhans, as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered 
before Him. 
 
10.2
 Then Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “The Shreemad Bhãgvat proclaims that 
Brahm is sãkãr.  However, if those who read it do not have bhakti of 
Bhagvãn,  they  will  understand Bhagvãn to  be nirãkãr,  even  from 
reading the Shreemad Bhãgvat.  Also, from the second skandh, which 
describes the characteristics of the refuge of Bhagvãn, those who are 
lacking  in bhakti will  again  understand Bhagvãn to  be nirãkãr.    In 
reality, Bhagvãn is not nirãkãr.  This is because it is through Bhagvãn 
that everything sthãvar and jangam is created.  Now, if Bhagvãn was 
nirãkãr,  then  how  could  He  create  something  that  is sãkãr?    For 
example,  ãkãsh  is nirãkãr.    Therefore,  trees,  mountains,  and  other 
forms  that  can  be  created  from pruthvi cannot  be  created from  that 
ãkãsh.    In  the  same  way,  since Brahmã and  the  rest  of  creation  is 
sãkãr, Bhagvãn, their creator, is also definitely sãkãr. 
 
10.3
 “Also, the Shreemad Bhãgvat states:  ‘The supporter of adhyãtma, 
adhibhut, and adhidev, is Bhagvãn’.    Now,  I  shall  explain  how,  so 
please  listen  carefully.   Adhyãtma (the indriyas of Virãt), adhibhut 
(the five mahã-bhuts of Virãt), and adhidev (the presiding devs of the 
indriyas of Virãt), all entered Virãt.  Despite this, Virãt was unable to 
awaken.    Then, Vãsudev Bhagvãn assumed  the svarup of Purush and 
entered Virãt,   which   caused Virãt-Purush to   awaken.    Bhagvãn 
therefore   acts   with   oneness   with   the adhyãtma, adhibhut,   and 
adhidev of Virãt-Purush.  However, in reality He is distinct from Virãt, 
and only  this svarup of Bhagvãn is  said  to  be  worthy  of  seeking 
refuge. 
 
10.4
 “For example, fire in the form of  light  is nirãkãr,  while Agni himself 
possesses  a  definite murti.    Moreover,  when Agni suffered  from 
indigestion (unable to digest ghee in the fire), he came to Krishna and 
Arjun  in  his  personified svarup.    Then,  when  he  went  to  burn  the 

GADHADÃ II 
- 452 - 
Khãndav forest of Indra, that same Agni assumed the svarup of flames 
and   spread   throughout   the   whole   forest.      In   the   same   way, 
Purushottam Bhagvãn pervades  all  through His antaryãmi powers, 
which  are brahm-rup.    However,  possessing  a  definite murti,  He  is 
also distinct from all.  Brahm itself is a ray of the light of Purushottam 
Bhagvãn,    while Bhagvãn Himself    always    possesses    a murti.  
Therefore,  a  person  who  aspires  to attain kalyãn should  realise 
Bhagvãn to  possess  a  definite murti and  should  maintain  His  firm 
refuge. 
 
10.5
 “Also, he should speak in such a way that does not break someone’s 
refuge  of Bhagvãn.    For  example,  just  as  a  woman  who  carries  a 
foetus  in  her  womb  attains  a  child,  person  who  carries  a  foetus 
(nishchay)  in Bhagvãn,  attains Bhagvãn’s Akshardhãm.    Therefore,  a 
person  should  practice  methods  that  never  endanger  the  foetus.    He 
should also talk to others in such a way that that foetus (nishchay) in 
Bhagvãn does not miscarry.” 
 
10.6
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  returned  to  Dãdã  Khãchar’s darbãr from 
Lakshmi-Vãdi.    He  sat  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on  the  veranda 
outside  the  east-facing  rooms.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
10.7
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  summoned  the  junior paramhans and  began  a 
discussion   amongst   them.      Achintyãnand   Swãmi   then   asked   a 
question:  “From gnãn, vairãgya, and bhakti, which one plays a more 
significant role in the development of love for Bhagvãn?” 
 
10.8
 No, one was able to answer that question.  So, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “I 
shall    answer    that    question,    and    I    shall    also    describe    the 
characteristics of gnãn, vairãgya, and bhakti. 
 
10.9
 “All people have a tendency  such  that  on  seeing  an  attractive  object, 
their  affection  for  any  object  that  is  not  as  attractive  will  naturally 

GADHADÃ II 
- 453 - 
diminish.  Therefore, before the bliss of Bhagvãn’s Akshardhãm, these 
worldly pleasures seem artificial; permanent bliss can only be found 
in the dhãm of Bhagvãn.  For that reason, if a person realises the bliss 
of Bhagvãn while  listening  to  talks  about Bhagvãn,  then  everything 
that  has  evolved  from Mãyã will  appear  worthless.    For  example,  a 
man  with  a  copper  coin  in  his  hand  will  lose  affection  for  it  when 
someone offers him a gold coin in exchange.  In the same way, when a 
person  realises  the  bliss  related  to Bhagvãn,  he  develops vairãgya 
towards  all  worldly  pleasures,  and  he  develops  love  only  for  the 
murti of Bhagvãn.  That is the characteristic of vairãgya. 
 
10.10
 “Now, I shall describe the characteristics of gnãn.  There are two sets 
of shãstras that  explain gnãn:    One  set  is  the  Sãnkhya shãstras,  and 
the other set is the Yog shãstras. 
 
10.11
 “Of these, the philosophy of the Sãnkhya shãstras is as follows:  Ãkãsh 
pervades pruthvi, jal, tej, and vãyu, and there is not even a tiny speck 
that  is  not  filled  with ãkãsh;  still  the  shortcomings of pruthvi, jal, tej, 
and vãyu,  do  not  effect ãkãsh at  all.    In  the  same  way  as ãkãsh,  no 
mãyik flaw can affect Purushottam Bhagvãn.  This fact is mentioned in 
the Krishnatãpni Upanishad as follows:  When Durvãsã Rushi came to 
Vrundãvan, Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn told  the  gopis, ‘Durvãsã Rushi is 
hungry; so all of you take dishes of food and go to him’. 
 
10.12
 “Then, the gopis replied, ‘But, the Yamunã flows along the way.  How 
shall we be able to cross it?’ 
 
10.13
 “Shree Krishna Bhagvãn replied, ‘Tell Yamunãji that if Shree Krishna is 
forever a brahm-chãri, then please make way for us’. 
 
10.14
 “Laughing, the gopis went to the banks of the Yamunãji and said this.  
Immediately,  Yamunãji  gave  way.    The gopis fed  the rushi,  and  he  in 
turn ate all the food.  Then the gopis asked him, ‘How shall we return 
home, as the Yamunã flows along the way?’ 

GADHADÃ II 
- 454 - 
10.15
 “The rushi then asked them, ‘How did you get here?’ 
 
10.16
 “The gopis then  explained, ‘Shree Krishna had told us that if he has 
been  a  brahm-chãri  since  childhood,  then  ask  Yamunãji  to  give  way.  
Therefore, Yamunãji gave way, and we have come to you’. 
 
10.17
 “Hearing  this,  the rushi said, ‘Tell  Yamunãji  that  if  Durvãsã  is 
continuously fasting, then please give way to us’. 
 
10.18
 “Again, laughing, the gopis said  this.    Immediately,  Yamunãji  gave 
way.      On   seeing   these   two   incidents,   the gopis were   totally 
astonished. 
 
10.19
 “Therefore, the svarup of Bhagvãn is  unaffected  in  the  same  way  as 
ãkãsh.    Despite  being  the  doer  of  all  actions, Bhagvãn still  remains  a 
non-doer;   and   although   He   is   associated   with   all,   He   remains 
absolutely  detached.    In this  way,  the  Sãnkhya shãstras describe 
Bhagvãn as  being  unaffected.    To  understand  this,  is gnãn according 
to the Sãnkhya philosophy. 
 
10.20
 “Now, I shall explain the philosophy of the Yog shãstras,  so  please 
listen.    The  philosophy  of  Yog  is  that  whoever  wishes  to  perform 
dhyãn on Bhagvãn should  first  stabilise  his  vision.    To  stabilise  the 
vision,  it  should  first  be  fixed  upon  the murti of Bhagvãn or  some 
other  object.    Then,  while  staring  at  the  same  object,  the  vision 
becomes  steady;  and  with  it,  the antah-karans also  becomes  steady.  
When  the antah-karans becomes  steady, Bhagvãn’s murti should  be 
visualised  in  the  heart.    This  would  not  be  difficult  for  the yogi who 
attempts   to   visualise   the murti;   he   can   behold   it   quite   easily.  
However,  if  a  person does  not  stabilise  his antah-karans through 
practice   from   the   beginning,   then   when   he   performs dhyãn on 
Bhagvãn, many other types of disturbing thoughts arise and obstruct 
his path. 
 
10.21
 “Therefore, the principle of the Yog shãstras is as follows:  ‘The vrutti 
should  first  be  stabilised  through  practice  before  it  is  attached  to 

GADHADÃ II 
- 455 - 
Bhagvãn’.    Realising  this  is gnãn according  to  the  Yog shãstras.  
Therefore,  to  strengthen  a  person’s  understanding  through  the 
philosophies of these two shãstras, is known as gnãn. 
 
10.22
 “Now, the method of practicing bhakti is as follows:  When the ocean 
was  churned, Lakshmiji emerged  from  the  ocean.    After  taking  a 
marriage garland in her hand, Lakshmiji thought, ‘Who is suitable for 
marriage?    I  shall  marry  him’.    Then,  wherever  she  looked  and 
examined,  whoever  was  handsome  lacked  qualities,  and  whoever 
possessed  qualities  lacked  beauty.    In  this  way,  she  noticed  great 
deficiencies in many.  She also saw deficiencies in all the devs and all 
the  demons.    Finally, seeing  that  it  was  only Bhagvãn who  was 
complete with all qualities, without any faults at all, and the source of 
all  bliss, Lakshmiji developed  profound bhakti towards Bhagvãn.  
With intense love, she placed the marriage garland around Bhagvãn’s 
neck,  and married Bhagvãn.    Therefore,  to  realise  such kalyãn-kãri 
qualities in Bhagvãn and to seek His firm refuge is known as bhakti.” 
 
10.23
 Hearing this, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, I have not yet quite 
understood  which  of  the  three  (gnãn, vairãgya,  or bhakti)  has  the 
greater power in developing love for Bhagvãn.” 
 
10.24
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Bhakti has  a  lot  of  power;  and  while 
gnãn and vairãgya also  have  power,  it  is  not  as  much  as  in bhakti.  
However,  true bhakti is  extremely  rare.    The characteristics  of  those 
who possess bhakti are as follows:  When Bhagvãn assumes a svarup 
like a human and travels on this earth for the sake of the kalyãn of the 
jeevs,  many  of Bhagvãn’s charitras are divya,  and  many  appear  to  be 
mãyik.    When Bhagvãn assumed  the avatãr of Krishna,  He  gave 
darshan to  Devki  and Vasudev  in  a  four-armed svarup;  He  also  lifted 
Mount  Govardhan;  He  cleaned  Yamunã’s  waters  of  poison  by 
removing  Kãliyã-Nãg;  He  suppressed  the  infatuation  of Brahmã;  and 
gave darshan to   Akrur   in   the   waters of   the   Yamunã.      He   also 
dispersed  the  grief  of  all  the  Yãdavs  by  killing  the  wrestlers,  an 

GADHADÃ II 
- 456 - 
elephant, as well as wicked persons like Kans.  Similarly, in the avatãr 
of Rãm, He broke the bow and also dispersed the grief of the devs by 
killing  wicked  persons  such  as  Rãvan.    These  and  other  such leelãs 
are known as the divya charitras of Bhagvãn. 
 
10.25
 “However, when Sitã was  abducted, Rãmchandraji appeared  to  have 
become  insane  due  to  constant  crying.    In  the avatãr of Krishna,  He 
fled  from  Kãlyavan,  was  defeated  by  Jarãsandh,  and  also  had  to 
surrender His kingdom in Mathurã to go and settle on an island in the 
sea.  These and other similar actions of Bhagvãn appear to be human-
like.    Even  a  sinner  would  perceive divya qualities  in  the divya 
charitras of Bhagvãn.    However,  a  true bhakta of Bhagvãn would 
perceive divya qualities  even  when Bhagvãn performs  human-like 
charitra.  In the Geetã, Bhagvãn has said: 
 
janma karma cha me divyam-evam yo vetti tattva-taha 
tyaktvã deham punar-janma naiti mã-meti sorjuna 
 
 “This shlok means:   ‘O Arjun!  My birth and my actions are divya.  
Whoever  realises  them  as  divya  will  not  take  another  birth  when  he 
leaves  his  body;  instead,  he  will attain me’.    So,  whenever Bhagvãn 
performs divya charitras, they appear divya to both a bhakta and to a 
person  who  is  not  a bhakta.    However,  when Bhagvãn performs 
human-like  actions,  a  true bhakta still  perceives divya qualities  in 
them,  but  by  no  means  does  he  perceive avgun in  the  human-like 
charitras of Bhagvãn.  Having this understanding is known as having 
bhakti towards Bhagvãn.  In fact, only such bhaktas earn the rewards 
mentioned in the above shlok. 
 
10.26
 “The gopis were bhaktas of Bhagvãn, and they never perceived avgun 
in Bhagvãn in any way.   On the other hand, King Parikshit perceived 
avgun in Bhagvãn just by listening to the talks about the gopis.  Shukji 
then  explained  those avgun to  be  false  by  illustrating  the  powers  of 
Bhagvãn.  Therefore, it is very rare to have bhakti in which a person 
perceives all the charitras of Bhagvãn as being divya, as the gopis did, 

GADHADÃ II 
- 457 - 
and never perceives avgun by understanding them to be human-like.  
In fact, it is not achieved by merely doing good deeds for one or two 
lives.    Only  when  the  pure sanskãrs of  many  lives  accumulate,  does 
bhakti like  that  of  the gopis develop.    In  fact,  this bhakti is  itself 
Akshardhãm.    It  is  this  type  of bhakti that  is  greater  than gnãn and 
vairãgya.    If  a  person  has  such bhakti in  his  heart,  what  would  be 
lacking in his love for Bhagvãn?  Nothing would be lacking.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 10 || 143 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 11 
All Karmas Becoming A Form Of Bhakti 
 
11.1
 In  the Samvat year  1878,  on Shrãvan vad 5    [18
th
 August  1821], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated 
bedstead    under  the  neem  tree  in  front  of  the mandir of Shree 
Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was 
dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
11.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “After listening to all the shãstras,  some 
people  believe  that  they  only  deal  with dharma, arth,  and kãm.  
Thinking this, they themselves also perform religious karmas, such as 
yagnas and vrats,  only  for  the  attainment  of dharma, arth,  and kãm.  
As  a  result,  they  enjoy  the  rewards  of  these karmas in  Dev-Lok, 
Brahm-Lok,  or  Mrutyu-Lok.    Then,  they  return  to  the  cycle  of  births 
and  deaths.    Therefore,  the  religious karmas that  a  person  performs 
while holding a desire for dharma, arth, and kãm, all become sãttvik, 
rãjasi,  and tãmasi;  and  the  rewards  of  those karmas are  enjoyed 
while  staying  in  the loks of  Svarg,  Mrutyu-Lok,  and  Pãtãl.    However, 
they do not attain the gunãtit dhãm of Bhagvãn.  As long as a person 
does  not  attain kalyãn,  the  miseries  of  births,  deaths,  and Narak do 
not diminish. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 458 - 
11.3
 “So, if a  person  abandons  the  desire  for  the  rewards  related  to 
dharma, arth,  and kãm,  and  if  he  performs  religious karmas only  to 
please Bhagvãn, then those religious karmas become a form of bhakti 
and aid in the attainment of kalyãn.  This is described in the following 
shlok: 
 
ãmayo yena bhootã-nãm jãyate yash-che suvrat 
tad-eva hyãmayam dravyam na punãti chikit-sitam 
evam nrunam kriyã-yogãha sarve sansruti-hetavaha 
ta evãtma-vinãshãya kalpante kalpitãha pare 
O observer of religious vows (Vyãs)!  Does not that same food which causes 
illness in beings – if purified and prescribed by a qualified doctor – cure that 
illness? Similarly, if all of a person’s karmas – which normally cause him to 
pass through births and deaths – are offered to Bhagvãn instead, those same 
karmas are destroyed, and are no longer capable of causing birth and deaths.  
Instead, they lead to his kalyãn. 
 
 “The essence of this shlok is as I have described earlier. 
 
11.4
 “However, this fact is actually very complex, and if it is not fully 
understood,  then  on  seeing  a bhakta of Bhagvãn behaving  in  the 
same  way  as  all  ignorant  people  do,  a  person  would  perceive avgun 
in  him.    As  a  result,  the  person  who  perceives  the avgun would  be 
sent to Narak. 
 
11.5
 “But, there is a vast difference between the actions of a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn and  the  actions  of  a vimukh.    How?    Well,  all  actions  of  a 
vimukh are  for  pampering  his indriyas,  whereas  all  actions  of  a 
bhakta of Bhagvãn are  solely  for  serving Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas.  
As a result, the bhakta’s actions are a form of bhakti. 
 
11.6
 “Moreover, bhakti is  like gnãn in  the  sense  that  both  are  a form of 
non-karma.    Therefore,  all  of  a bhakta’s actions  are  in  a form of 
karmas that do not cause attachment.  This is described in a shlok in 
the Bhagvad Geetã: 
 

GADHADÃ II 
- 459 - 
karmanya-karma yaha pashyed-akarmani cha karma yaha 
sa buddhimãn-manushyeshu sa yuktaha krutsna-karma-krut 
 
 “The meaning of this shlok is as follows:  If a person sees non-karma 
(gnãn)  in  the karmas performed  by  the bhaktas of Bhagvãn for  the 
purpose of pleasing Bhagvãn, and he sees a vimukh who has adopted 
the  path  of nivrutti as  living  by  non-karmas,  then  such a  person  is 
said  to  possess gnãn and  is  the  most  intelligent  amongst  all  people; 
he is a yogi; he is worthy to attain kalyãn, and is krutsna-karma-krut 
(has performed all karmas). 
 
11.7
 “Therefore, if a person perceives avgun in  a bhakta of Bhagvãn who, 
by Bhagvãn’s ãgnã,  performs karmas for  the  purpose  of  pleasing 
Bhagvãn, then adharma and its followers will enter and reside in his 
heart.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 11 || 144 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 12 
The Art Of Ruling 
 
12.1
 In the Samvat year 1878, on Shrãvan vad 6 [19
th
 August 1821], Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  in  front  of  the mandir of 
Shree   Vãsudev-Nãrãyan on   the   veranda   outside   the   west-facing 
rooms  of  Dãdã  Khãchar’s darbãr in   Gadhadã.      He   was   dressed 
entirely   in   white   clothes.      A sabhã of paramhans,   as   well   as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
12.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “I wish to talk to you, so please listen.  In 
the  talk  I  am  about  to  deliver,  I  shall  describe  only  one  spiritual 
activity  for  attaining kalyãn,  but  it  is  so  powerful  that  all  other 
spiritual activities are incorporated within it.  It is as follows: 
 

GADHADÃ II 
- 460 - 
12.3
 “The jeev,  which  resides  in  the  body,  feels, ‘Kãm, krodh, and other 
vicious natures are attached to my jeev’.    In  this  way,  depending  on 
which of  the  vicious  natures is  predominant in  a  person,  he  believes 
his jeev to  be  full  of  that  nature  due  to  his  association  with  it.  
However,  not  a  single  one  of  these  vicious  natures  lies within  the 
jeev; the jeev has merely believed itself to possess them out of its own 
foolishness. 
 
12.4
 “Therefore, a person who wishes to attain Akshardhãm should  make 
an  effort,  but  he  should  not  relax  or  lose  courage.    Also,  he  should 
think, ‘Just as the four  antah-karans,  the  ten  indriyas,  and  the  five 
prãns reside in this body, similarly, I am the jeevãtmã, and I also reside 
in  this  body.    However,  I  am  greater  than  all  of  them,  and  I  am  their 
controller’.    But,  he  should  not  think, ‘I am insignificant, whereas  the 
antah-karans and indriyas are strong’.  For example, if a king were to 
possess  little  or  no  intelligence,  then  even  the  members  of  his  own 
family  would  not  obey  his  orders.    When  the  people  in  the  village 
hear  about  this,  no  one  in  the  village would  obey  his  orders.    Also, 
when  the  people  throughout  the  kingdom  hear  about  this,  no  one  in 
the  kingdom  would  obey  his  orders.    As  a  result,  the  king  would 
become  depressed  and  powerless.    He  would  sit  idly  and  would  not 
attempt to enforce his rule over anyone. 
 
12.5
 “In this analogy, the king symbolises the jeev,  the  members  of  the 
household  symbolise  the antah-karans,  and  the  people  of  the  village 
and   kingdom   symbolise   the indriyas.      So,   if   the jeev becomes 
discouraged  and  relaxes  its  authority,  then when  it  wishes  to  use  its 
power  over  the antah-karans and  adjust  them  towards Bhagvãn,  the 
antah-karans will not follow.  Also, if it wishes to control the indriyas, 
even  the indriyas will  not  comply.    Then,  even  though  the jeev is  the 
king of the kingdom (body), it becomes helpless like a beggar.  When 
a  king  becomes  discouraged,  his  subjects  who  live  in  his  kingdom 
assume  power  and  do  not  allow  him  to  use  his  authority  at  all.  
Likewise, in the kingdom (body) of the jeev, the vicious natures – who 

GADHADÃ II 
- 461 - 
are  not  the  king – take  control.    Then,  they  do  not  allow  the jeev to 
have any power. 
 
12.6
 “Therefore,  a  person  who  aspires  to  attain kalyãn should  never 
become  timid,  and should  employ  whatever  measures are  necessary 
to force the indriyas and antah-karans to accept his authority – like a 
king   who   studies   books   about   the   art   of   ruling   and   then   uses 
authority  over  his  kingdom,  but  is  not  suppressed  by  his  subjects.  
However, if the king did not know the art of ruling, the people would 
not  obey  his  orders.    Instead,  they  would  become  unhappy,  or  he 
himself would behave miserably because no one would obey his rule.  
In  this  way,  not  knowing the  art  of  ruling  results  in  two  unfortunate 
consequences.    Similarly,  if  the jeev were  to  attempt  to  rule  the 
kingdom  (body)  without  understanding  the  art  of  ruling,  then  it 
would never become happy.” 
 
12.7
 Then,  Muktãnand  Swãmi  asked  Shreeji  Mahãrãj,  “How  should  a 
person, who wishes to attain kalyãn, learn the art of ruling?” 
 
12.8
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The art of ruling should be learnt in the 
following  way:    First  of  all,  a  person  should  thoroughly  realise  the 
greatness   of Bhagvãn.      Then,   he   should   conquer   his   mind   by 
performing dhyãn on Bhagvãn’s murti.  He should conquer his ears by 
listening to talks related to Bhagvãn, but he should not allow worldly 
talks  to  be  heard  by  the  ears.    In  the  same  way,  the  skin  should only 
be  allowed  to  touch Bhagvãn and  the bhaktas of Bhagvãn.    The  eyes 
should  only  be  allowed  to  do darshan of Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas.  
The tongue should forever sing the praises of Bhagvãn and taste only 
the prasãd of Bhagvãn.  The nose should only be allowed to smell the 
fragrance  of  flowers  and  other  objects  that  have  been  blessed  by 
Bhagvãn.    None  of  the indriyas should  be  allowed  to  follow  the 
unrighteous  path.    When  a  person  behaves  in  this  way,  no  one  can 
overthrow his authority in the kingdom (body). 
 

GADHADÃ II 
- 462 - 
12.9
 “Only a person who makes an effort in this way and totally discards 
timidity  is  said  to  be  walking  on  the  path  of kalyãn.    This  is  an 
extremely great method for overcoming his svabhãvs.  If this method 
of  personal  effort  is  practiced  vigilantly,  then  all  spiritual  activities 
for   attaining kalyãn are   incorporated   within   the   one   activity.  
Therefore,   personal   effort   itself   is   the   greatest   of   all   spiritual 
activities for attaining kalyãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 12 || 145 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 13 
The Svarup Within The Divine Light 
 
13.1
 In  the Samvat year  1878,  on Shrãvan vad Amãs [27
th
 August  1821], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  square  cushion 
on the veranda outside the mandir of Shree Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was wearing a white khes and had 
covered Himself with a white chãdar.  He had also tied a white pãgh 
around  His  head.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
13.2
 Raising  both  arms  in  the  air,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  signalled  the sabhã to 
settle  down  and  listen.    Turning  to  the sãdhus who  were  humbly 
praying  before  Him  with  folded  hands,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “O 
paramhans!    All  the  senior sãdhus,  along  with  those  who  are  wise, 
please  come  to  the  front.    Please  listen  very  carefully  to  what  I  am 
about  to  say.    What  I  am  about  to  say  to  you,  I  am  not  saying  out  of 
any pretence, or out of any pride, or to spread my own greatness.  To 
be more precise, it is because I feel that amongst all of you sãdhus and 
bhaktas,    if    someone    can    understand    my    message,    it    will 
tremendously   benefit   him;   that   is   my   purpose   in   narrating   it.  
Moreover, this talk is based on what I have seen and realised through 
my own experience.  In fact, it is also in agreement with the shãstras.  

GADHADÃ II 
- 463 - 
Although  I  feel  that  it  is  not  appropriate  to  discuss  this  in  public,  I 
shall tell you nonetheless. 
 
13.3
 “I naturally remain in a state in which even if I wished to engage my 
mind  in  the    most  charming  sounds,  the  most  charming  touch,  the 
most   charming   smells,   the   most   charming   tastes,   and   the   most 
charming  sights  of  this  world,  I  could  not  do  so;  I  remain  absolutely 
unhappy  towards  them.    In  fact,  all  the  attractive vishays and  the 
repulsive vishays are  the  same  to  me.    Also,  a  king  and  a  beggar  are 
the  same  to  me;  and  to  rule  all  the loks and  to  beg  for  food  with  a 
broken begging bowl are the same to me; and sitting with honour on 
an  elephant  and  walking  on  foot  are  the  same  to  me.    Whether 
someone  honours  me  with  sandalwood  paste,  flowers,  fine  clothes, 
and  ornaments,  or  throws  dirt  on  me – all  are  the  same  to  me.  
Whether  someone  praises  me  or  insults  me – both  are  the  same  to 
me.    Gold,  silver,  diamonds,  and  waste  are  all  the  same  to  me.  
Moreover,  I  look  upon  all bhaktas of Bhagvãn as  being  equal – I  do 
not differentiate one bhakta as being superior and another bhakta as 
being inferior. 
 
13.4
 “I have intense vairãgya in  my antah-karans,  yet  I  am  not  burdened 
by  it.    I  do  not  feel  burdened  like  a  person  who carries  a  heavy  rock 
on  his  head  or  ties  a  purse  full  of  money  and  gold  coins  around  his 
waist.    My  strict  observance  of svadharma does  not  burden  me,  nor 
does   the   understanding   that   I   am brahm burden   me.      When   I 
superficially    praise    an    object    or    criticise    another,    I    do    so 
purposefully.  Whenever I forcefully engage the vruttis of my indriyas 
towards objects, they remain there unwillingly; as soon as I relax that 
force, they withdraw immediately.  It is like throwing a stone into the 
air – it goes as high as it can depending on the force of the throw, but 
ultimately it falls back to earth.  Also, consider the example of a weak 
animal.  It can stand only as long as a man forcefully supports it; but 
as  soon  as  he  withdraws  the  support,  the  animal  slumps  onto  the 
ground.  In addition, imagine a very strong man who is able to crack a 

GADHADÃ II 
- 464 - 
betel  nut  between  his  teeth.    However,  after  sucking  ten  or  twenty 
very   sour   lemons,   he   would   have   great   difficulty   chewing   even 
roasted chick-peas.  In this way, it is only when I forcefully engage my 
vruttis in the vishays that they remain engaged in them. 
 
13.5
 “What is the cause of my behaving like this?    Well,  it  is  because  the 
vruttis of my indriyas constantly remain inverted towards my hruday-
ãkãsh.    In  that hruday-ãkãsh,  I  see  extremely  luminous  divine  light.  
Just  as  the  clouds  cover  the  entire  sky  during  the  monsoon  season, 
only that light pervades my heart. 
 
13.6
 “Amidst that  divine  light I  see  the  extremely luminous murti of 
Bhagvãn.    The murti is  dark,  but  due  to  the  intensity  of  the  light,  it 
appears  to  be  fair,  not  dark.    The murti has  two  arms  and  two  legs, 
not  four,  eight  or  a  thousand  arms;  and  its  appearance  is  very 
charming.    The murti is  very  tranquil;  it  has  a  human svarup;  and  it 
appears  young  like  a  teenager.    Sometimes  the murti in  the  divine 
light is seen standing; sometimes sitting; and at other times, it is seen 
walking  around.    It  is  surrounded  by  groups  of muktas on  all  four 
sides, who are seated facing Him, and who are engaged in looking at 
that murti of Bhagvãn with  a  fixed gaze.    I  see  that murti in  its 
pratyaksha svarup before  me  at  this  very  moment.    I  saw  it  before  I 
came  into  this satsang; I could see it when I was in my mother’s 
womb; in fact, I could see it even before I entered my mother’s womb.  
Moreover, I am speaking to you while sitting there (hruday-akãsh).  I 
do  not  see  this  village  of  Gadhadã  or  even  this  veranda.    I  see  all  of 
you sitting there as well. 
 
13.7
 “Whoever  realises  this svarup will  never  be  drawn  towards  the 
pleasures of the vishays.  In fact, you also see this svarup  of Bhagvãn, 
but  you  do  not  fully  understand  it.    However,  when  you  come  to 
understand  this  fact,  you  will  not  come  across  any  difficulty  in 
suppressing  the  desires  of  the panch-vishays and svabhãvs,  such  as 
kãm and krodh; they will be suppressed easily. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 465 - 
13.8
 “That consistent divine light is referred to as the ãtmã, Brahm, or 
Akshardhãm.    The murti of Bhagvãn within  the  light,  is  called  the 
essence  of  the ãtmã, Parbrahm,  or Purushottam.    It  is  that  same 
Bhagvãn who,  for  the kalyãn of  countless jeevs,  incarnates  on  this 
earth  in  different yugs,  in  the avatãrs such  as Rãm and Krishna.    In 
this lok, He appears to be like a human being, but He is not; He is the 
lord of Akshardhãm.  Shree Krishna Bhagvãn has said in the Geetã: 
 
na tad-bhãsyate suryo na shashanko na pãvakaha 
yad-gatva na nivartante tad-dhãma paramam mama 
My supreme dhãm is not illuminated by Surya, or by Chandra, or by Agni. 
Having attained my dhãm, no one returns from it. 
 
 “Therefore, even though Shree Krishna Bhagvãn appeared to be like a 
human, He is still greater than Akshar and is divya. 
 
13.9
 “Whoever performs dhyãn on  the  human murti of Bhagvãn sees  the 
luminous, divya   murti seated   in Akshardhãm.      A   person,   who 
performs dhyãn in   this   way,   passes   through Mãyã and   attains 
Akshardhãm.  So, even though Bhagvãn assumes a human body, He is 
still divya, and the place where He resides is also nirgun.  His clothes, 
jewellery,  vehicles, sevaks,  food,  drinks,  and  any  other  objects  which 
become  associated  with  Him,  are  all nirgun.    A  person,  who  realises 
Bhagvãn’s svarup in  this  way,  does  not  have  any  affection  for  the 
panch-vishays, just like I do not.  He becomes independent. 
 
13.10
 “It is this Purushottam,  who  is  greater  than Akshar,  and  who  is  the 
cause of all avatãrs.  All avatãrs originate from Purushottam, and they 
merge  back  into Purushottam.    When Bhagvãn leaves  this  earth  to 
return  to  His dhãm after  assuming  a  human svarup,  sometimes  His 
physical  body  remains  on  earth  like  a  human  being – like  when 
Rukmani  took Shree  Krishna’s body into her lap and was engulfed 
along with it in the fire.  Similarly, Rushabh-Dev’s body was burnt in a 
raging  forest  fire.    In  other  instances,  His  bones  and  flesh  become 
divya, and   He   returns   to   His dhãm without   leaving   behind   any 

GADHADÃ II 
- 466 - 
remains.    When  He  incarnates,  He  may  sometimes  be  born  of  a 
woman,  or  He  may  sometimes  appear  from  whatever  He  wishes.    In 
this  way, Bhagvãn’s method  of  birth  and  death  are  not  always  in 
accordance  with  the  ways  of  this  world.    When  you  thoroughly 
realise Bhagvãn in this way, you will come across no obstacles on the 
path  of kalyãn.    Without  this  firm  understanding  of  the  nature  of 
Bhagvãn,  a  person  will  never  be  able  to  overcome  his  weakness, 
regardless of the amount of tyãg he maintains or the number of upvãs 
he performs. 
 
13.11
 “Then you may say, ‘We have firm understanding of that Bhagvãn just 
as  you  have  described.    Then,  why  do  our  prãns  and  indriyas  not 
become engaged in Bhagvãn?’  Well, a person should understand that 
as being Bhagvãn’s wish.  In reality, such a person has nothing left to 
accomplish;  he  is  fulfilled  and  has  reached  the  end  of  all  spiritual 
activities.  If a person has a firm belief in Bhagvãn, then even if there 
is  a  slight  flaw  in  remaining nirmãni, nirlobhi, nishkãmi, nisvãdi,  or 
nisnehi,   there   is   still   nothing   to   worry   about.      However,   if   any 
deficiency  remains  in  understanding Bhagvãn,  then  that  flaw  will 
never   be   eradicated.      Therefore,   a   person   should   attempt   to 
understand this principle by any means within this lifetime. 
 
13.12
 “If a person has completely understood the essence of this talk, then 
regardless  of  whether  a  person  is  reborn  in  a  lower  or  higher  life-
form due  to  his prãrabdha karmas,  like  Vrutrãsur,  he  will  not  forget 
this gnãn.  Also, when Bharatji was reborn as a deer, he retained gnãn 
from his previous life.  That is the profound greatness of this gnãn.  In 
fact, it  is  even  narrated continuously in  the sabhãs of sãdhus such  as 
Nãrad, the Sanakãdik, and Brahmã and other devs. 
 
13.13
 “However,  talks  regarding  the  nature    of Bhagvãn cannot    be 
understood by a person on his own; not even from the shãstras.  Even 
though  these  facts  may  be  in  the shãstras,  it  is  only  when  the sat-
purush manifests  on  this  earth,  and  a  person  hears  them  being 

GADHADÃ II 
- 467 - 
narrated to him, that he understands them.  However, they cannot be 
understood by a person’s intellect alone, even from the shãstras. 
 
13.14
 “A person who has completely understood the svarup of Bhagvãn, 
and who is also able to see the past, present, and future, still does not 
have  the  slightest  pride  regarding  this  fact.    He  would  not  grant 
anyone a vardãn, and nor would he curse anyone; but sometimes, he 
may grant a vardãn or give a curse.  At times, he remains fearless, and 
at  other  times,  he  may  even  become  frightened.    Despite  that,  he 
would  never  allow  emotions  such  as  happiness  or  depression  to 
come into his mind.  A person who has such an unflinching refuge of 
Bhagvãn would  never  knowingly  perform  a  bad  deed.    However,  if 
due  to  unpleasant  circumstances  an  improper  deed  is  performed,  a 
person with such a refuge would still not fall from the path of kalyãn.  
Therefore, there is no other obstacle-free path like that of having the 
firm refuge of Bhagvãn. 
   
13.15
 “A person who has understood this fact, has  only  pure  intentions.    I 
have  absolutely  no  selfish  expectations  from  my paramhans and 
satsangis.    The  only  reason  I  may  call  someone,  lecture  someone,  or 
send  someone  away,  is  that  if  by  any  means  a  person  realises  this 
fact;  it  will  be  very  beneficial to  them.    So,  all  of  you  should  firmly 
remember this talk.  
 
13.16
 “Also, you should all understand that the murti amidst  the  divine 
light is this Mahãrãj visible before you.  If you cannot do that, then at 
least  realise, ‘Mahãrãj sees the murti which  is amidst  that  akshar-rup 
light’.    Even  if  you  can  understand  this  much,  you  will  be  able  to 
maintain  love  for  me.    As  a  result,  you  will  attain ãtyantik kalyãn.  
Keep  this  principle  constantly  new  and  fresh  in  your  minds;  never 
forget it out of pride.  Remember it tomorrow just as it is today.  Keep 
it  vivid  in  your  minds  and  remember  it  daily  until  the  end  of  your 
lives.    Whenever  you  talk  about Bhagvãn,  be  sure  to  implant  the 
seeds  of  this  principle.    This  is  my ãgnã.    Moreover,  this  principle  is 
so  vital  that  you  should  remember  it  daily  for  the  rest  of  your  lives.  

GADHADÃ II 
- 468 - 
In  fact,  even  after  you  leave  this  body  and  attain  a divya svarup,  you 
should  recall  it.    This  principle, which  I  have  revealed  before  you,  is 
the very essence of all the shãstras, and it is my own firm experience.  
I have talked to you having seen it with my very own eyes.  In fact, I 
take  oath  on  all  of  you paramhans that  I  have  seen  these  facts  with 
my own eyes.” 
 
13.17
 In  this  way, Shreeji  Mahãrãj  indirectly  described  His  true identity as 
Purushottam.    Upon  hearing  this  revelation,  the sãdhus and bhaktas 
accepted  the  fact  that  the murti described  amidst  the  divine  light  is, 
in fact, Shreeji Mahãrãj Himself. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 13 || 146 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 14 
Nirvikalp Samãdhi 
 
14.1
 In  the Samvat year  1878,  on Bhãdarvã sud 1  [28
th
 August  1821], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  veranda  outside 
the north-facing rooms near the mandir of Shree Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in 
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  wearing  a  white khes, 
and  had  covered  Himself  with  a  white chãdar.    Around  His  head,  He 
had  tied  a  white feto in  which  a chhoglu of  red karnikãr flowers had 
been   inserted.      A   beautiful, kum-kum chãndlo also   adorned   His 
forehead.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various 
places, had gathered before Him. 
 
14.2
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “When a sãdhu attains oneness with 
the svarup of Bhagvãn,  does  he  attain  it  through samãdhi,  or  can  he 
also attain it through some other method?” 
 
14.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Once a person has known that this is a neem 
tree, he never has the doubt in his mind, ‘Is this a neem tree, or not?’  
Similarly, if a person has a total understanding of Bhagvãn’s svarup as 
I  described  yesterday,  if he  no  longer  has  any  doubts  about it, and  if 

GADHADÃ II 
- 469 - 
his mind in no way causes his belief of Bhagvãn to waver regardless 
of  the  type  of  company  he  may  encounter  or  the  type  of shãstras he 
may hear, then such absolute nishchay is what I call oneness. 
 
14.4
 “Such  oneness  is  attained  through  profound  association  with  an 
ekãntik  bhakta of Bhagvãn,  but  not  by samãdhi alone.    In  fact,  such 
oneness  is  itself nirvikalp samãdhi.    Moreover,  the sãdhu who  has 
such nirvikalp samãdhi is  also  called nirgun brahm.    Regardless  of 
whether  he  follows  the  path  of nirvrutti or  the  path  of pravrutti,  the 
sãdhu who  has  such  an  unshakeable nishchay is  still nirgun.    For 
example, Nãrad and  the Sanakãdik all  followed  the  path  of nivrutti, 
whereas  the  Sapta  Rushis,  and  Janak  Rãjã,  all  followed  the  path  of 
pravrutti.  However, due to their nishchay in Bhagvãn, they should all 
be known to be nirgun. 
 
14.5
 “However, those who follow the path of nivrutti,  but  do  not  have 
nishchay in Bhagvãn, should be known to be sagun due to their mãyik 
qualities.  Furthermore, a person should realise, ‘This person appears 
to be a strict tyãgi, but because he does not have the belief of Bhagvãn, 
he is ignorant and will definitely go to Narak’. 
 
14.6
 “On the other hand, a person who has nishchay in Bhagvãn will  not 
attain  an  unpleasant  fate – even  if  some  small  deficiency  remains  in 
him.  In fact, ultimately, he will definitely attain the nirgun state.  But, 
a person without this belief of Bhagvãn – even if he is a sincere tyãgi 
and is vigilantly striving to eradicate kãm, krodh, and lobh, – will not 
be   able   to   eradicate   those   vicious   natures   by   his   efforts   alone.  
Ultimately, he will become evil and go to Narak. 
 
14.7
 “Therefore, whoever has attained such gnãn of Bhagvãn,  even  if  he 
has only a weak intellect, should still be regarded as possessing great 
intellect.    On  the  other  hand,  if  he  has  not  attained  such gnãn of 
Bhagvãn, then even if he has great intellect, he should still be known 
as having no intellect.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 14 || 147 || 

GADHADÃ II 
- 470 - 
Gadhadã II – 15 
Keeping Hatred Towards The Svabhãvs 
 
15.1
 In  the Samvat year  1878,  on Bhãdarvã sud 2  [29
th
 August  1821], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  square  cushion 
which  had  been  placed  on  the  veranda  outside  the mandir of Shree 
Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was 
dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
15.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked all the paramhans a question:  “There is 
a  single  thought  which  can  destroy  any svabhãv,  regardless  of  how 
difficult  it  may  be.    Without  that  thought,  the svabhãv cannot  be 
eradicated even if a person were to apply a thousand other thoughts.  
What    is    that    thought?        Please answer    according    to    your 
understanding.” 
 
15.3
 The paramhans replied  according  to  their  understanding,  but  none 
were able to give a complete explanation. 
 
15.4
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “I shall explain.  If a person’s enemy were 
to  ruin  whatever  work  he is  doing,  or  if  he  were  to  swear  at  his 
mother  or  sister,  then  he  would  have  an  intense  hatred  for  him  and 
would  employ  any  means  whatsoever  to  harm  him.    If  not  that,  he 
would at least be extremely happy if someone else were to harm him.  
In  the  very  same way,  if  the  inner  enemies,  such  as kãm and krodh, 
obstruct a person while he is striving to attain kalyãn, he would hold 
the same sort of hatred towards them as well; and that hatred would 
never  diminish.    Whoever  applies  such  a  thought  can  eradicate  all 
svabhãvs with that thought alone. 
15.5
 “Now, if a sãdhu were to criticise and insult those inner enemies, then 
a  person  who  had  the  previously  mentioned  thought  would  not 
develop  a  hatred  towards  that sãdhu;  he  would  be  grateful  to  the 
sãdhu and  would  feel, ‘This sãdhu is helping me conquer my enemy, 
and  therefore  he  is  an  extremely  great friend’.    A  person  who  has 

GADHADÃ II 
- 471 - 
attained  such  a  thought  can  destroy  all  of  his  inner  enemies.    As  a 
result,   no   vicious svabhãvs will   be   able   to   remain  in   his  heart.  
Without  this  thought,  the  inner  enemies  (svabhãvs)  can  never  be 
overpowered,  regardless  of  whichever  types  of  other  thoughts  may 
be  applied.    Therefore,  keeping  hatred  towards  the svabhãvs is  the 
greatest thought of all.” 
 
15.6
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “By which characteristics can  someone 
recognise a person who would never deflect from the four attributes 
of dharma, vairãgya, gnãn of the ãtmã, and bhakti of Bhagvãn coupled 
with knowledge of His greatness?” 
 
15.7
 All  the sãdhus attempted  to  answer  the  question  according  to  their 
understanding, but no one was able to give a precise answer. 
 
15.8
 So, Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “From childhood, if a person has such 
a nature that he would never be suppressed by anyone’s personality, 
nor  could  anyone  mock  someone  or  joke  in  his  presence,  nor  could 
anyone  make  even  a  mild  sarcastic  comment  at  him,  then  such  a 
person  would  never  deflect  from dharma, vairãgya, gnãn,  and  the 
bhakti of Bhagvãn.    Even  though  his  personality  may  make  him 
appear  arrogant,  because  of  his  enthusiasm  to  attain kalyãn,  he  will 
not leave satsang under any circumstances.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 15 || 148 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 16 
Faith In Bhagvãn And Faith In Dharma 
 
16.1
 In  the Samvat year  1878,  on Bhãdarvã sud 10  [7
th
 September  1821], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  wooden  bench 
near the mandir of Shree Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr 
in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of 

GADHADÃ II 
- 472 - 
munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various places,  had  gathered 
before Him. 
 
16.2
 Then,  Muktãnand  Swãmi  asked,  “Some  may  have nishchay in 
Bhagvãn,  like  Arjun,  and  others  may  have nishchay in dharma,  like 
Yudhishthir.    Of  these  two,  if  a  person  attempts  to  maintain  faith  in 
Bhagvãn,  faith  in dharma may  decline;  and  if  a  person  attempts  to 
maintain  faith  in dharma,  faith  in Bhagvãn may  decline.    So,  what 
method can a person use so that neither of the two declines?” 
 
16.3
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “The  first skandh of   Shreemad   Bhãgvat 
includes  a  discussion  between Pruthvi and Dharma,  which  mentions 
that Bhagvãn possesses  the  thirty-nine kalyãn-kãri characteristics, 
such  as  truthfulness  and  purity.    Therefore,  all  forms  of dharma are 
supported  by  the murti of Bhagvãn.    This  is  why Bhagvãn is  called 
dharma-dhurandhar (the upholder of dharma). 
 
16.4
 “Also, in the first skandh of  the  Shreemad  Bhãgvat,  the Sanakãdik 
rushis ask  Sutpurãni, ‘In whom did dharma seek refuge after Shree 
Krishna  Bhagvãn – who  was  the  shield  for  dharma – reverted  to  His 
dhãm?’  Therefore, dharma takes  refuge  only  in Bhagvãn’s murti.  
That  is  why  when  a  person  keeps  faith  in Bhagvãn’s murti, Bhagvãn 
comes and dwells in that person’s heart.  As a result, dharma also 
dwells in his heart.  Therefore, faith in dharma naturally develops in a 
person   who   possesses   faith   in Bhagvãn.      However,   if   a   person 
maintains faith in dharma alone, then faith in Bhagvãn will decline.  It 
is  for  this  reason  that  a  person  who  is  intelligent  should  certainly 
maintain  firm  faith  in Bhagvãn;  and  as  a  result  faith  in dharma will 
also remain firm.” 
 
16.5
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked another question:  “Can the desires 
for  the panch-vishays be  conquered  by vairãgya,  or  can  they  be 
conquered by other means?” 
 

GADHADÃ II 
- 473 - 
16.6
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “Whether or not a person has vairãgya, if 
he  attentively  follows  the niyams prescribed  by Bhagvãn,  then  the 
desires for the panch-vishays can be conquered. 
 
16.7
 “With vairãgya,  a  great  deal  of  effort  is  required  to  withdraw  a 
person’s vrutti from  sounds;  and  even  then,  the  ears  can  still  hear.  
However, if the ears are simply plugged, then naturally no sound will 
be    heard.        Similarly,    if    a    person    does    not    touch    anything 
inappropriate,  he  automatically  conquers  touch.    In  the  same  way,  if 
he  does  not  look  at  anything  improper,  he  automatically  conquers 
sight.    Also,  when  there  is  delicious  food,  if  he  mixes  it  together  and 
adds water to it, and he controls his diet, then the sense of taste will 
automatically  be  conquered.    If  he  blocks  his  nose  when  there  is  an 
attractive smell, he also automatically conquers the sense of smell.  In 
this  way,  the panch-vishays can  be  conquered  by  following niyams.  
However, if a person does not follow these niyams, then regardless of 
how intense his vairãgya may be, or how much gnãn he may possess, 
he  will  not  remain  stable  in  any  way.    Therefore,  the  only  way  to 
overcome  the  desires  for  the panch-vishays is  to  follow  the niyams 
prescribed  by Bhagvãn.    Furthermore,  for  those  who  have  little 
vairãgya, remaining within niyams is the only way of being saved, just 
as   an   ill   person   can   only   be   cured   if   he   controls   his   diet   and 
completes his course of medication.” 
 
16.8
 Then, Akhandãnand Swãmi asked, “An ill person has a fixed number 
of   days   over   which   he   must   follow   his   course   of medication.  
Similarly,  is  there  a  definite  time  period  for  which  a  person  must 
make an effort to attain kalyãn?” 
 
16.9
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “It takes a person who has weak shraddhã 
many  lives  to  reach  the  highest  point  of  his  spiritual  activities.  In 
fact, the Bhagvad Geetã states: 
 
anek-janma-sansiddh-stato yãti parãm gatim 
 

GADHADÃ II 
- 474 - 
 “This shlok explains  that  only  a yogi who  has  become siddh after 
many  lives,  attains Akshardhãm.    This  has  been  said  for  those  who 
have less shraddhã. 
 
16.10
 “In  comparison, a   person   who   has   strong shraddhã becomes 
enlightened  immediately.    This  is  also  mentioned  in  the  Bhagvad 
Geetã: 
  
shraddhãvan-labhate gnãnam tat-paraha sanyatendriyaha 
gnãnam labdhvã parãm shãntima-chirenã-dhigach-chhati 
  
 “The meaning of this shlok is, ‘A person whose indriyas are under 
control and who also possesses shraddhã, attains gnãn.  Upon attaining 
that gnãn, such a person immediately attains Akshardhãm’.  Therefore, 
a  person  who  has  intense shraddhã reaches  the  highest  point  of  his 
spiritual activities sooner, whereas a person who has weak shraddhã 
reaches that state after many lives.  For example, if a man is going to 
Kãshi, but walks only two steps throughout day, it will obviously take 
him  many  days  to  reach  Kãshi.    On  the  other  hand,  if  he  starts 
walking twenty miles a day, it will take him only a few days to reach 
Kãshi.  In the same way, if a person has intense shraddhã, then even if 
he  has  only  recently  become  a satsangi,  he  will  still  become  great.  
Conversely,  a  person  who  has  little shraddhã,  even  though  he  may 
have joined satsang a long time ago, still remains weak.” 
 
16.11
 Then, Shree Gurucharanratãnand Swãmi asked, “If those who have 
less shraddhã attain kalyãn after many lives, where do they stay until 
then?” 
 
16.12
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “They go and reside in the beautiful loks of 
the devs.    This  is  because  when  that bhakta performed dhyãn on 
Bhagvãn, he used to look towards Bhagvãn, and Bhagvãn used to look 
towards him as well.  However, Bhagvãn was aware of the vishays the 
bhakta thought  about  and  had  affection  for  while  performing dhyãn 
on Him.  Therefore, when the bhakta leaves his body, Bhagvãn sends 

GADHADÃ II 
- 475 - 
him  to  a lok full  of  the vishays for  which  he  had  a  passion.   Bhagvãn 
also issues the following command to Kãl:  ‘You should not interfere in 
this bhakta’s indulgence in the vishays’.    As  a  result,  that bhakta 
remains  in  the loks of  the devs and  enjoys  those  pleasures.    Then, 
when  he  returns  to  Mrutyu-Lok,  he  eventually  attains kalyãn after 
many lives.” 
 
16.13
 Akhandãnand  Swãmi  then asked another question:  “What are the 
characteristics of a person who possesses intense shraddhã?” 
 
16.14
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Whenever a person with intense shraddhã 
wants to engage in an activity related to Bhagvãn – such as going for 
the darshan of Bhagvãn,  or  listening  to  talks  and kathãs related  to 
Bhagvãn, or performing His mãnsi pujã – then to be able to do so, he 
would become very quick in carrying out his bodily activities, such as 
bathing.    Also,  if  I  were  to  write  a  letter  changing  a  particular 
vartmãn,  he  would  be  eager  to  abide  by  it.    In  addition,  even  if  he 
were  a  senior  person,  he  would  become  as  impatient  as  a  child  to 
have the darshan of Bhagvãn.  A person who has such characteristics 
should be known as a person who possesses intense shraddhã. 
 
16.15
 “A person who has such shraddhã is able to immediately conquer all 
of  his indriyas.    However,  the indriyas of  a  person,  who  has  little 
shraddhã on  the  path  of Bhagvãn,  are  extremely  attached  to  the 
vishays.    Moreover,  no  matter  how  hard he  tries  to  hide  it,  everyone 
still  realises  the  fact  that  this  person’s indriyas are   extremely 
attached towards the vishays.” 
 
16.16
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “The indriyas are  like  the  wind – 
even  though  the  wind  cannot  be  seen,  it  can  be  assumed that  the 
wind  is  blowing  by  the  way  in  which  it  shakes  the  trees.    Similarly, 
the vruttis of  the indriyas cannot  be  seen,  but  everyone  realises  that 
they  flow  towards  the vishays.    If  a  person  deceitfully  attempts  to 
hide  this,  then  realising  him  to  be  deceitful,  others  will  criticise  him 

GADHADÃ II 
- 476 - 
even  more.    Therefore,  in  no  way  can  a  person  conceal  that  intense 
craving of his indriyas to indulge in the vishays.” 
 
16.17
 Muktãnand Swãmi then asked, “How can those intense cravings of 
the indriyas to indulge in the vishays be eradicated?” 
 
16.18
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The only means to eradicate the intensity of 
the indriyas is to force the indriyas to follow the niyams for tyãgis and 
grahasthas as prescribed by Bhagvãn.  As a result, the intensity of the 
indriyas automatically diminishes.  When a person does not allow the 
five indriyas (the ears, the skin, the eyes, the tongue, and the nose) to 
wander, the diet of the indriyas becomes pure, after which the antah-
karans become  pure  as  well.    Therefore,  regardless  of  whether  a 
person possesses intense vairãgya or not, if he conquers his indriyas 
and  keeps  them  within  the niyams prescribed  by Bhagvãn,  he  can 
conquer  the  desires  for  the vishays more  thoroughly  than  a  person 
with intense vairãgya.  Therefore, a person should firmly abide by the 
niyams prescribed by Bhagvãn.” 
 
16.19
 Akhandãnand Swãmi asked again, “If a person has weak shraddhã, 
how can it become stronger?” 
 
16.20
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If a person can realise the greatness of 
Bhagvãn then  even  if  he  has  weak shraddhã,  it  will  grow  stronger.  
For  example,  a  person  would  never  be  attracted  to  clay  utensils  that 
are used for drinking water.  However, if those utensils were made of 
gold,  then  he  would  naturally  be  attracted  to  them.    Similarly,  if  he 
realises  the  greatness  of  the  talks  and kirtans related  to Bhagvãn, 
then  his shraddhã in Bhagvãn and  in  those  activities  will  naturally 
increase.      Therefore,   a   person   should   use   whichever   method   is 
necessary  to  understand  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn.    If  he  does  use 
such a method, then even if he has no shraddhã at all, he will develop 
shraddhã; and if he has weak shraddhã, it will become stronger.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 16 || 149 || 

GADHADÃ II 
- 477 - 
Gadhadã II – 17 
Tattvas In The Svarup Of Bhagvãn 
Sthitapragna 
 
17.1
 In  the Samvat year  1878,  on  the  night  of Ãso vad 11  [21
st
 October 
1821],  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a sinhãsan 
on the veranda outside the rooms near the mandir of Shree Vãsudev-
Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed 
entirely in white clothes.  Two torches were lit in front of Him.  While 
kirtans were being sung, a sabhã of paramhans, as well as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
17.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Please stop the kirtans now, and  let  us 
begin a question-answer discussion.” 
 
17.3
 Then, all the munis replied, “Very well, Mahãrãj.” 
 
17.4
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then raised a question:  “Some bhaktas understand 
the svarup of Bhagvãn as  being  composed  of  the  twenty-four tattvas 
of Mãyã,  while  some  understand  it  as  being  composed  purely  of 
chaitanya and free of mãyik elements.  Of these two types of bhaktas, 
whose   understanding   is   correct,   and   whose   understanding   is 
incorrect?” 
 
17.5
 Muktãnand  Swãmi  replied,  “The understanding of  a  person who 
considers Bhagvãn’s svarup as  being  composed  of  the  twenty-four 
mãyik elements  is  incorrect.    The  understanding  of  a  person  who 
considers Bhagvãn’s svarup as  being  composed  purely  of chaitanya, 
and free of mãyik tattvas, is correct.” 
 
17.6
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Followers of the Sãnkhya philosophy 
claim   that   there   are   twenty-four tattvas.      According   to   that 
philosophy,  there  are  twenty-three tattvas,  and  the  twenty-fourth  is 
kshetragna – in  the form of jeev and ishvar – which  is  composed  of 

GADHADÃ II 
- 478 - 
chaitanya.    The  twenty-four tattva have  been  described  in  this  way.  
This is because kshetra and kshetragna have a mutual dependence on 
each  other.    Without kshetragna, kshetra cannot  be  described,  and 
without kshetra, kshetragna cannot  be  described.  For  this  reason, 
jeev and ishvar have been included with the elements, while Bhagvãn 
has  been  described  as  the  refuge  of  both kshetra and kshetragna.    In 
this  case,  how  can  the mãyik tattvas be  described  as  being  distinct 
from Bhagvãn?    For  example,  four tattvas reside  within ãkãsh,  yet 
ãkãsh is  unaffected  by  any  of  their  flaws.    In  the  same  way,  not  a 
single flaw of the mãyik tattvas influences the svarup of Bhagvãn.  So, 
what   is   the   inconsistency   in   believing   that Bhagvãn’s svarup is 
composed  of  the  twenty-four tattvas?    Does  claiming ‘Bhagvãn’s 
svarup is not composed of the tattvas’ prevent inconsistencies?  This is 
how I understand it.” 
 
17.7
 Then,   Dinã-Nãth  Bhatt  asked,  “Should  a  person  who  wishes  to 
perform dhyãn on Bhagvãn’s svarup understand it as being composed 
of the tattvas or understand it as not being composed of the tattvas?” 
 
17.8
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “A  person  who  understands Bhagvãn’s 
svarup as  being  composed  of  the tattvas,  is  a  sinner;  and  a  person 
who  understands Bhagvãn’s svarup as  not  being  composed  of  the 
tattvas is also a sinner.  Those who are bhaktas of Bhagvãn do not at 
all  like  to  senselessly  quibble  over  whether  or  not Bhagvãn’s svarup 
is  composed  of  the tattvas.    A bhaktas realises, ‘Bhagvãn is Bhagvãn.  
There is no scope for dividing or discarding any part of Him.  That very 
Bhagvãn is the ãtmã of countless brahmãnds’.  A  person  who  has  no 
doubts  at  all  regarding  the  nature  of Bhagvãn should  be  known  to 
have   attained   the nirvikalp state.      A   person   with   such stable 
understanding   should   be   known   as ‘sthitapragna’.      Moreover, 
Bhagvãn redeems  all  the  sins  of  a  person  who  has  such  stable 
understanding regarding Bhagvãn. 
 
17.9
 “In the Bhagvad Geetã, Bhagvãn has said to Arjun, 

GADHADÃ II 
- 479 - 
 
sarva-dharman-parityajya mãme-kam sharanam vraja 
aham tvam sarva-pãpebhyo mokshayi-shyãmi mã shuchaha 
Abandon all other forms of dharma and surrender only unto me. 
I shall deliver you from all sins; so do not grieve. 
 
17.10
 “In fact, it is a usual custom in this world that an intelligent person 
will not notice a fault in someone who serves his major self-interests.  
For  example,  to  serve  her  self-interest,  a  woman  will  not  notice  any 
faults  in  her  husband.    This  also  applies to  other grahasthas who  do 
not  notice  the  faults  in  their  relatives,  if  they  have  intense  self-
interest  in  them.    In  the  same  way, if  a  person  realises  that Bhagvãn 
serves  his  own  self-interest – Bhagvãn relieves  His bhaktas of  their 
sins  and  ignorance  and grants  them kalyãn – then  he  will  never 
perceive avgun in Bhagvãn in any way. 
 
17.11
 “For  example,  when  Shukji  narrated  the rãs-leelã,  Parikshit  Rãjã 
raised  the  following  doubt:   ‘Why did Bhagvãn associate with other 
women?’  However, Shukji did not have the slightest doubt.  Even the 
gopis,  with  whom Bhagvãn engaged  in  romantic  actions,  did  not 
doubt  by  thinking, ‘If He is Bhagvãn, why does He behave like this?’  
They  did  not  have  any  such  doubts.    Moreover,  when Bhagvãn went 
to the home of Kubjã, He took Uddhavji along with Him, yet Uddhavji 
did not have any doubts at all.  Also, when Uddhavji was sent to Vraj, 
he  still  did  not  have  any  doubts  on  hearing  the  words  of  the gopis.  
Instead, he greatly realised the greatness of the gopis. 
 
17.12
 “Therefore, the understanding of a person who has developed an 
unwavering refuge of Bhagvãn will not become distorted, regardless 
of  whether  he  is  very  educated  in  the shãstras,  or  he  is  naïve.    Also, 
the  greatness  of  a  loyal bhakta of Bhagvãn can  only  be  realised  by  a 
person who is a bhakta of Bhagvãn.  Regardless of whether a person 
is  educated  in  the shãstras or  is  naïve,  only  a  person  with  a  firm 
understanding  of Bhagvãn realises  the  greatness  of  a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn,   and   only   he   recognises   a bhakta possessing   a   firm 

GADHADÃ II 
- 480 - 
understanding.    On  the  other  hand, vimukhs in  the  world,  regardless 
of whether they are pandits or fools, are unable to develop such firm 
understanding of Bhagvãn.  Moreover, they do not recognise a bhakta 
possessing   a   firm understanding,   and   nor   do   they   realise   the 
greatness  of  a bhakta of Bhagvãn.    Therefore,  only  a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn can  recognise  another bhakta of Bhagvãn,  and  only  he  can 
realise  his  greatness.    For  example,  Uddhavji  realised  the  profound 
greatness  of  the gopis.    Likewise,  the gopis realised  the  greatness  of 
Uddhavji. 
 
17.13
 “Although Purushottam Bhagvãn is the kshetragna of all kshetragnas, 
He  is  still  not  subject  to  change.    Moreover,  the  disturbances  of 
objects  that  cause  disturbances – such  as Mãyã – do not  influence 
Purushottam Bhagvãn.    In  fact,  if  the  disturbances  of sthul, sukshma, 
and kãran do not influence a person who has realised the ãtmã, what 
can   be   said   about   them   not   influencing Purushottam Bhagvãn?  
Therefore, Bhagvãn is   certainly   not   subject   to   change;   He   is 
absolutely unaffected. 
 
17.14
 “A bhakta of Bhagvãn who understands Bhagvãn’s svarup in this way 
should  be  known  to  be ‘sthitapragna’.    Just  as  a  person  who  has 
realised  his ãtmã is  called ‘sthitapragna’,  a bhakta of Bhagvãn who 
has no doubts at all regarding the svarup of Bhagvãn, and glorifies His 
strengths,   is   also   called ‘sthitapragna’.      He   also   glorifies   those 
charitras of Bhagvãn that  appear  to  be  inappropriate,  in  exactly  the 
same  way  that  he  glorifies charitras that  are  appropriate – without 
having any doubts about the appropriateness or inappropriateness of 
those charitras.      Such   a bhakta should   be   known   as   being 
‘sthitapragna’ with  regards  to  the  nature  of Purushottam.    A  person 
who  has  developed  such  a  firm  belief  of  the  nature  of Purushottam 
has nothing more left to understand.” 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 17 || 150 || 
 
 

GADHADÃ II 
- 481 - 
Gadhadã II – 18 
Nãstik And Shushka-Vedãnti 
 
18.1
 In  the Samvat year  1878,  on Mãgshar vad 6  [7
th
 December  1821], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress  with  a 
large, cylindrical pillow that had been placed in His residence in Dãdã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was wearing a white khes, and had 
covered  Himself  with  a  white chãdar,  over  which He  had  wrapped  a 
richly  embroidered rajãi.    He  had  also  tied  a  white feto around  His 
head.  At that time, Prãgji Davé was reading a shãstra before Him, and 
a sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places, 
had gathered before Him. 
 
18.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Having thought over it from all aspects, I 
have come to the following conclusion: Of all the kusang in the world, 
the kusang which is worse than all others is that of those who do not 
have bhakti towards Bhagvãn.    Also,  they  do  not  have  the  faith  in 
their hearts that Bhagvãn loves His bhaktas, is the lord of all, is patit-
pãvan, and is also adham-udhãran.  In this world, two thoughts share 
these  beliefs:    One  is  that  of  the nãstiks,  and  the  other  is  that  of  the 
shushka-vedãntis.  Both are extreme forms of kusang.  Now, even if a 
person has committed the five great sins, but he has faith in Bhagvãn, 
then  at some  time  or  another  he  will  be  redeemed.    In  fact,  even if  a 
person has committed the great sins of killing a child, slaughtering a 
cow, or killing a woman, then he too can be redeemed at some point 
in  time.    However,  a  person  who  has  come  to  accept  either  of  these 
two  sets  of  beliefs  will  never  be  redeemed.    This  is  because  such  a 
person’s  understanding  is  contrary to  that  of  the  Veds,  the  six-
shãstras, and the Purãns. 
 
18.3
 “Of the two, the nãstiks believe that Rãmchandraji and Shree Krishna 
Bhagvãn were  actually  only  kings;  and  because Shree  Krishna killed 
demons and committed adultery, he has been sent to the third Narak.  
Therefore, in no way do they consider Shree Krishna Bhagvãn, who is 

GADHADÃ II 
- 482 - 
patit-pãvan and adham-udhãran,  as  being Bhagvãn.    Instead,  they 
believe  their kalyãn to  be  through karmas.    They  believe  that  while 
performing karmas, they attain keval-gnãn, and become Bhagvãn.  In 
this   way,   they   believe   that   there   are countless Bhagvãns.      So, 
according to the belief of the nãstiks, there is no one, eternal Bhagvãn, 
by  whose  worship  a jeev is  released  from  the  bondage  of  births  and 
deaths.  Therefore, that belief is not in accordance with the Veds. 
 
18.4
 “The shushka-vedãntis believe  that brahm itself  has  assumed  the 
svarup of  the jeevs – just  as  in  the  relationship  between  the  sun  and 
its reflection.  Therefore, when a person realises ‘I am brahm’, he has 
no further  spiritual  activities  left  to  perform.    Then,  when  he  has 
become Bhagvãn, he does not need to worship anyone.  Thinking this, 
they no longer have fear in committing sins.  Moreover, they believe, 
‘We have attained the nirgun path, so we will not have  to  take  birth 
again’.    However,  the shushka-vedãntis do  not  examine  their  own 
understanding  which  implies  that nirgun brahm,  which  is  beyond 
Mãyã,  will  also  have  to  pass  through  births  and  deaths.    This  is 
because  they  claim  that brahm itself  has  assumed  the svarup of  all 
sthãvar and jangam objects.    This  means  that  just  as  a jeev has  to 
undergo  births  and  deaths, brahm also  has  to  undergo  births  and 
deaths.    Also,  while  they  think, ‘We will be released from births and 
deaths’,  they  do  not  realise, ‘According  to  our  own  beliefs,  births  and 
deaths  have  become  a  reality  for  brahm  itself.    Therefore,  if  we  do 
develop  deep  understanding,  at  most  we  shall  realise  ourselves  to  be 
brahm-svarup.    But  even  then,  the  cycle  of  births  and  deaths  will  still 
not  be  dispelled’.    As  a  result,  by  their  own  beliefs, moksh is  proven 
false.    Nevertheless,  no  one  examines  this.    Instead,  they  boast, ‘We 
are brahm-svarup, so who do we need to worship?  Who do we bow to?’  
Thinking  this,  they  become  extremely  arrogant.    Even  though  they 
have  not  truly  understood  anything,  they  still  have  pride  of  their 
gnãn.    However,  they  do  not  realise  that  their  own moksh is  proven 
false  by  their  own  beliefs.    Moreover,  they  convert  those  who  keep 
their company into fools as well. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 483 - 
18.5
 “However, bhaktas possessing   true gnãn,   such   as Nãrad,   the 
Sanakãdik,   and   Shukji,  constantly   perform dhyãn upon Bhagvãn, 
chant  His  holy  name,  and  sing kirtans.    Even  the niranna-muktas in 
Shvet-Dvip,   who   are brahm-svarup and   who   can   control Kãl, 
continuously perform dhyãn upon Bhagvãn, chant His holy name, and 
sing kirtans about  Him.    They  also  offer pujã,  smear  sandalwood 
paste on Him, and perform dandvats.  Despite being akshar-rup, they 
behave  as  the dãs of Purushottam Bhagvãn.    Also,  the  residents  of 
Badrikãshram,  including  Uddhav,  Tanu  Rushi,  and  the  other munis, 
perform tap and continuously offer bhakti to Bhagvãn.  On the other 
hand,  the shushka-vedãntis are  completely  oriented  around  their 
bodies.   Also,  they  do  not  perform dhyãn upon Bhagvãn, nor do they 
chant  the  name  of Bhagvãn,  and  nor  do  they  bow  before Bhagvãn.  
Compared  to  the  power  and gnãn of Nãrad,  the Sanakãdik,  and 
Shukji;  and  compared  to  the  power  and gnãn of  the niranna-muktas 
who  reside  in  Shvet-Dvip;  and  compared  to  the  power  and gnãn of 
the rushis who reside in Badrikãshram, these shushka-vedãntis do not 
possess  even  a  millionth  of  a  fraction  of  such  power  and gnãn.  
Nevertheless, they equate themselves with Bhagvãn.  Therefore, they 
are  absolutely  ignorant.    In  fact,  they are  the  most  ignorant  of  all 
ignorant  people.    Even  after  spending  countless  millions  of  years  in 
the pits of Narak suffering the torments of Yam, they will still not be 
released. 
 
18.6
 “Therefore, to associate with such people is the very definition of 
kusang.  Just as there is no deed greater than keeping the company of 
the sat-purush,  conversely,  there  is  no  sin  worse  than  keeping  the 
company of ignorant people such as the shushka-vedãntis.  Therefore, 
a person who desires moksh should in no way keep the company of a 
nãstik or a shushka-vedãnti.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 18 || 151 || 
 
 

GADHADÃ II 
- 484 - 
Gadhadã II – 19 
Distress After Hearing Shushka-Vedãnti Shãstras 
Letter To The Haribhaktas 
 
19.1
 In  the Samvat year  1878,  at  daybreak  on Mãgshar vad 14  [23
rd
 
December  1821],  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  arrived  at  the 
residential   hall   of   the paramhans in  Dãdã  Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Gadhadã.    In  an  unhappy  mood,  He  sat  down  on  a  mattress  with  a 
large, cylindrical pillow.  He refused to talk to anyone, or even look at 
anyone.    The  white feto tied  around  His  head  had  loosened  and 
become  undone,  yet  He  paid  no  attention  to  it.    In  this  way,  He  sat 
extremely  unhappy  for  a  while.    Tears  then  begun  to  flow  from  His 
eyes. 
 
19.2
 Then,  addressing  the paramhans,  Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “To learn 
about the beliefs of those possessing shushka-gnãn, I listened to their 
shãstras.  However, simply hearing them has caused much grief in my 
heart.    This  is  because  by  listening  to  the shushka-vedãnti shãstras, 
the upãsanã of Bhagvãn is  dispelled  from  the  mind,  and  a  sense  of 
equality arises in a person’s heart, and he begins to worship devs.  By 
listening  to  the  words  of  those shushka-vedãntis, a person’s mind 
becomes   extremely   corrupted.      Even   though   I   listened   to   the 
principles  of shushka-vedãnti with  a  specific  purpose,  doing  so  has 
brought me much grief.” 
 
19.3
 Having  said  this,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  became  very  unhappy,  and  sat  in 
silence    with    His    heart    filled    with    sorrow.        After    remaining 
disheartened  for  a  long  time,  He  wiped  the  tears  from  His  eyes  with 
His hands and said, “I went to sleep last night after listening to 
Rãmãnuj’s commentary on the Bhagvad Geetã.  I had a dream in 
which  I  went  to Golok,  where  I  saw  countless pãrshads of Bhagvãn.  
Of  these,  some  serve Bhagvãn,  and  they appear  to  be  very  still.  
Others   sing kirtans of Bhagvãn,   including kirtans composed   by 
Muktãnand   Swãmi   and   Brahmãnand   Swãmi.      In   the   process   of 
singing kirtans, they sway in the same way as a person who sings and 

GADHADÃ II 
- 485 - 
sways in euphoria due to intoxication.  Then, I also joined those who 
were  singing  and  began  to  sing kirtans.   While  singing,  the  following 
thought arose:  ‘A person who shuns such loving bhakti and upãsanã of 
Bhagvãn,  and  claims  to  possess  gnãn,  and  believes,  ‘I  myself  am 
Bhagvãn’, is extremely wicked’.” 
 
19.4
 Having said this, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Let us write a letter to send to 
the satsangis in  various  places  so  that  they  never  lapse  in  observing 
dharma and  in  offering bhakti to Bhagvãn in  any  way,  and  so  that 
their  mind  is  never  dislodged  from  this ishta-dev, Shree  Krishna-
Nãrãyan. 
 
19.5
 “‘Written  by  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj.    All  paramhans  and 
all  satsangis – male  and  female – please accept sincerest ‘Nãrãyan’ 
from  me.    I  am  issuing  the  following  as  my  ãgnã:   The  avatãr  of  Shree 
Krishna-Nãrãyan – Purushottam Bhagvãn – incarnates among humans 
and  devs,  for  the  purpose of  establishing  dharma,  uprooting  adharma, 
and giving darshan to and protecting His ekãntik bhaktas who possess 
the  four  qualities  (dharma  in  the form of  brahm-chãrya  and ahinsã, 
ãtmã-nisthã,   vairãgya,   and   bhakti   coupled   with  the  knowledge   of 
Bhagvãn’s greatness).  Therefore, a person should have a singular 
belief  of  that  avatãr – just  as  Sitãji  was  convinced  that  Rãmchandraji 
was  flawless.    A  person  should  also  lovingly  perform  the  mãnsi  pujã  of 
that  Bhagvãn  and  physically  offer  to  Him  the  nine  types  of  bhakti.    If 
that avatãr of Shree Krishna-Nãrãyan is not present on this earth, then 
he  should  perform  pujã  of  His murti mentally  and  also  physically  by 
offering sandalwood paste, tulsi, flowers, and other similar offerings. 
 
19.6
 “Moreover,  he  should  offer  upãsanã  only  to  Bhagvãn  and  not  to  any 
dev; if he does, it is a great sin.  In this way, his vow of fidelity is lost and 
his bhakti becomes like that of a prostitute.  Therefore, a person should 
offer  bhakti  to  Bhagvãn  in  the  way  of  Sitã  and  Rukmani.    He  should 
perform  dhyãn  only  on  that  Bhagvãn  and  not  on  any  dev,  and  nor 
should  he  perform  dhyãn  on  a  sãdhu,  even  if  he  has  attained  an 
elevated state and mastered samãdhi. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 486 - 
19.7
 “Furthermore,  all  should  strictly  abide  by  the  dharma  of  their  varna 
and  ãshram.    All  men  who  firmly  abide  by  this  ãgnã  of  mine  will 
develop firm bhakti towards Shree Krishna Nãrãyan like that of Nãrad.  
All  women  who  accept this  injunction  of  mine will develop  firm  bhakti 
towards  Shree  Krishna-Nãrãyan,  like  that  of  Lakshmiji  and  the  gopis, 
such  as  Rãdhikãji.    Conversely,  the  bhakti  of  those  who  do  not  accept 
these words of mine will become like that of a prostitute. 
 
19.8
 “Written on Mãgshar vad 14, Samvat 1878’.” 
 
19.9
 After  writing  this  letter,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  had  it  sent  to  all satsangis 
residing in various places. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 19 || 152 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 20 
The Sense Of Knowing And The Strength Of the Indriyas 
 
20.1
 In the Samvat year 1878, on Posh vad 14 [22
nd
 January 1822], Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  in  front  of  the mandir of 
Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He 
was  wearing  a  white khes and  had  covered  Himself  with  a  white 
chofãl, above which He Had wrapped a rajãi made of chhint.  He had 
also tied a white pãgh around His head.  A sabhã of munis, as well as 
haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered  before  Him.    Some  of 
the paramhans were  singing kirtans to  the  accompaniment  of a 
mrudang.   
 
20.2
 Then,   addressing   the paramhans,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “At  my 
residence  today,  I  asked  a  question  to  Somlã  Khãchar  and  the  other 
bhaktas who  stay  with  me.    I  would  like  all  the paramhans to  get 
together and answer that question.” 
 
20.3
 The paramhans requested,  “Mahãrãj,  may  we  please  hear  that 
question.” 

GADHADÃ II 
- 487 - 
20.4
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “A person who masters samãdhi attains a 
spiritual  state  that  is  beyond mãyã.    He  also  has  firm  bond  with  the 
svarup of Bhagvãn.  Therefore, the person’s mental ability, as well as 
the  strength  of  his  body  and indriyas,  should  increase.    This  is 
because  the  twenty-four tattvas,  which  have  been  produced  from 
Mãyã, have a form that is both jad and chaitanya; they cannot be said 
to  be  only jad,  nor  can  they  be  said  to  be  only chaitanya.    Also,  the 
strength in each of the elements cannot be said to be equal.  There is 
a greater degree of awareness in the antah-karans than there is in the 
indriyas.  Likewise, there is a greater degree of awareness in the jeev 
– the drashtã of  the indriyas and antah-karans – than  there  is  in  the 
antah-karans. 
 
20.5
 “When the jeev experiences samãdhi,  it  abandons  its  role  as  the 
drashtã of  the indriyas and antah-karans; and  like Brahm,  that jeev 
becomes chaitanya,  and  its  bond  with  the svarup of Bhagvãn is 
maintained.    Now,  regarding  those  who  have  mastered samãdhi, 
some  people  think, ‘Whoever  experiences  samãdhi,  loses  even  the 
knowledge he had previously’.    So,  do  the  mental  ability  and  the 
strength  of  the  body  and indriyas of  a  person  who  has  mastered 
samãdhi increase or not?  That is the question.” 
 
20.6
 The paramhans then  answered  according  to  their  intellect,  but  no 
one  was  able  to  give  an  adequate  answer  to  Shreeji  Mahãrãj’s 
question. 
 
20.7
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “I  will  answer.    The  answer  to  the 
question  is  that Brahm,  who  is  the  witness,  enters  the brahmãnd – 
which   is   composed   of   the   twenty-four tattvas,   and   which   was 
produced  from Mãyã – and  makes  it chaitanya.    This  gives  it  the 
power to perform all activities.  The nature of that Brahm is such that 
when  it  enters  an  object  that  is  as jad as  wood  or  stone,  that  object 
becomes  an  object  that  can  move.    When  the jeev becomes  one  with 
that Brahm through samãdhi,  then  that jeev can  also be  said  to  be 
brahm-rup.  As a result, its gnãn also increases. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 488 - 
20.8
 “With regards to the strength of the indriyas, a person who practices 
yog,  coupled  with tap, nivrutti dharma,  and vairãgya,  attains siddh-
dashã like  that  of  Shukji.    On  the  other  hand,  there  may  be  a  person 
whose tap,  observance  of nivrutti dharma, and vairãgya are  at  an 
ordinary  level,  and  who  follows  the  path  of pravrutti in  the form of 
dharma, arth,  and kãm.    In  his  case,  although  he  may  experience 
samãdhi,  only  his gnãn will  increase, but  the  strength  of  his indriyas 
does  not  increase  and  he  does  not  attain siddh-dashã.    In  fact,  even 
though a person may possess gnãn like Janak Rãjã, those who follow 
the   path   of pravrutti do   not   attain siddh-dashã like Nãrad,   the 
Sanakãdik, and Shukji.  On the other hand, a person who has attained 
siddh-dashã can travel to all places in this lok and beyond.  However, 
for those who follow the path of pravrutti, like Janak Rãjã, only their 
gnãn increases; but it does not decrease. 
 
20.9
 “In fact,  what  happens  is  described  by Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn in  the 
Geetã in the shlok: 
 
yã nishã sarva-bhootãnãm tasyãm jãgarti sayyamee 
yasyãm jãgrati bhootãni sã nishã pashyato munehe 
 
 “The meaning of this shlok is:   ‘A self-controlled  person  is  awake  to 
that  which  all  other  beings  are  asleep;  and  that  to  which  all  other 
beings  are  awake,  a  self-controlled person is asleep’.  Specifically,  a 
person  whose  vision  is  facing  inwards  towards  the ãtmã has  no 
regard to his body, indriyas, or antah-karans.  On seeing this, a person 
who   is   ignorant   thinks, ‘The  gnãn  of  a  person  who  experiences 
samãdhi decreases’.    As  a  result,  if  a  person  under  the  influence  of 
rajo-gun, tamo-gun,  or  impure sattva-gun attempts  to  answer  this 
question, then he would certainly think that the gnãn of a person who 
experiences samãdhi does decrease.  However, he does not realise, ‘I 
constantly  believe  myself  to  be  the  body  and  am  speaking  out  of 
foolishness’. 
 
20.10
 “Therefore,  the gnãn of  a  person  who  experiences samãdhi still 
increases  even  though he  behaves  distinctly  from  the  body, indriyas, 

GADHADÃ II 
- 489 - 
and antah-karans.  Even  after  he  returns  to  the indriyas and antah-
karans,  the gnãn obtained  during samãdhi is  still  not  destroyed.    As 
for  a  person  who  takes  up tap, nivrutti dharma, and vairãgya – after 
abandoning the path of pravrutti – just as his gnãn has increased, the 
strength of his indriyas and antah-karans will increase as well.  Also, 
he will attain siddh-dashã like Nãrad, the Sanakãdik, and Shukji.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 20 || 153 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 21 
Bhagvãn Is The Cause Of All 
 
21.1
 In  the Samvat year  1878,  on Fãgan sud Punam [7
th
 March  1822], 
Swãmi Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in front of the mandir 
of Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He 
was  wearing  a  white khes and  had  covered  Himself  with  a  white 
chãdar.  He had also tied a white pãgh around His head.  Premãnand 
Swãmi and other paramhans were singing vishnupad before Him. 
 
21.2
 Then, Shreeji  Mahãrãj said, “Please stop the kirtans.    I  wish  to speak 
to all of you, so please listen attentively.”  He then said, “I have 
listened to all the shãstras written by Vyãsji regarding the attainment 
of kalyãn.  The main principle prevalent in all those shãstras and the 
only  principle  for  the kalyãn of  the jeev is  simply  this:   Bhagvãn 
creates, maintains, and destroys this entire universe. 
 
21.3
 “Also, in all of those shãstras, there are talks of the charitras of either 
Bhagvãn or  His sant.    So,  a  person  cannot  attain kalyãn just  by 
following the dharma of his varna and ashram, or through its rewards 
in the form of dharma, arth, and kãm.  This is because the observance 
of the dharma on its own may bring worldly reputation and physical 
comforts – but  that  is  all.    However,  to  attain kalyãn,  a  person  must 
realise Bhagvãn to be the all-doer. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 490 - 
21.4
 “In addition, nothing remains to be understood on the path of kalyãn 
if a person realises the greatness of pratyaksha Bhagvãn and His sant 
in exactly the same way as he realises the greatness of past avatãrs of 
Bhagvãn such as Rãm, and Krishna, and the greatness of past sãdhus, 
such   as Nãrad,   the Sanakãdik,   Shukji,   Jadbharat, Hanumãn,   and 
Uddhav. 
 
21.5
 “Whether this principle is understood after being told  once,  or  after 
being told a thousand times; whether it is understood today, or after 
a thousand years, there is no option but to understand it.  If a person 
were  to  ask Nãrad,  the Sanakãdik,  Shukji, Brahma,  and Shiv,  as  they 
are  wise,  even  they  would  point  to pratyaksha Bhagvãn and  the 
pratyaksha sant as  being  the  only  granters  of kalyãn.    They  would 
also  explain  that  the  greatness  of  the pratyaksha svarup of Bhagvãn 
and  the pratyaksha sant  is  exactly  the  same  as  the  greatness  of  past 
svarup of Bhagvãn and His sant. 
 
21.6
 “A  person  who  has  such  a  firm nishchay,   has   grasped   all   the 
fundamental  principles.    What  is  more,  he  will  never  fall  from  the 
path of kalyãn.  Brahmã, Shiv, Bruhaspati, Parãshar, and many others 
may  have  fallen  from  the  path  of dharma due  to  vicious  natures  like 
kãm and krodh,   but   because   they   had   the   same nishchay and 
knowledge    of    the    greatness    of pratyaksha Bhagvãn and    the 
pratyaksha sant as they had of their past lives, they did not fall from 
the  path  of kalyãn.    Therefore,  this  very  fact  is  the  essence  of  all  the 
shãstras.” 
 
21.7
 In  the  evening  of  that  same  day,  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj 
mounted His horse in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã and came to 
Lakshmi-Vãdi.      There,   He   sat   on   a   decorated   bedstead   on   the 
platform  under the  mango  tree.    He  was  wearing  a  white khes and 
had  covered  Himself  with  a  white chãdar.    He  had  also  tied  a  white 
pãgh around His head, with a tassel of yellow flowers hanging from it.  
Bunches  of mogrã flowers  were  placed  upon  His  ears,  and  a  garland 

GADHADÃ II 
- 491 - 
of mogrã flowers was hanging around His neck.  A sabhã of munis, as 
well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
21.8
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Please listen, I wish to ask all of you a 
question.  During the svapna state, when the jeev sees a creation and 
indulges in the pleasures of that creation, does the jeev itself become 
the svarup of the creation?  Or does the jeev create the creation in its 
svapna by its own will?  Also, in the same way as the jeev, the ishvars 
also   experience creations   during   their svapna state.      Do   they 
themselves  become  the svarup of  the  creation?    Or  do  they  create  it 
by  their  own  will?    Or  does Bhagvãn,  who  is  beyond  both jeev and 
ishvar, create the creations experienced in their svapnas?” 
 
21.9
 Everyone attempted to answer the question according to his level of 
intelligence, but no one was able to offer a precise explanation. 
 
21.10
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then explained, “Neither the jeev nor ishvar creates 
the  creations  experienced  during  the svapna state,  and  nor  do  they 
become  the svarup of  those  creations  themselves.    In  reality,  it  is 
Bhagvãn – who  is  beyond  both jeev and ishvar,  and  who  is  also  the 
giver of the rewards of a person’s karmas – who  creates  the  world 
experienced in svapnas according to the karmas of the particular jeev 
or ishvar. 
 
21.11
 “The unstable and deceptive nature of svapnas is  due  to  their  region 
of  origin.    The  throat  is  a  place  where  countless  types  of  such 
creations  can  be  seen – just  as  when  an  oil  lamp  is  lit  in  one  place 
within  a mandir decorated  with  mirrors,  countless  oil  lamps  would 
be  seen.    Therefore,  due  to  the  location  of  its  origin  (the  throat),  a 
single thought can be experienced in countless ways.” 
 
21.12
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “A person possessing gnãn understands 
only  the  influence  of desh to  be  predominant  when  there  is  the 
predominance  of desh;  when  the  influence  of kãl is  predominant,  he 

GADHADÃ II 
- 492 - 
understands  only kãl to  be  predominant;  when  the  influence  of 
karma is    predominant,    he    understands    only karma to    be 
predominant;   and   when Bhagvãn’s influence   is   predominant,   he 
understand only Bhagvãn to be predominant.  In contrast, a fool, once 
he  has  understood  one  factor,  considers  that  alone  to  be  the  main 
principle.    If  he  has  understood kãl,  he  considers kãl to  be  the  main 
principle;  if  he  has  understood karma,  he  considers karma to  be  the 
main principle; and if he has understood mãyã, he considers mãyã to 
be  the  main  principle.    However,  such  a  fool  does  not  know  how  to 
distinguish between the different predominating factors prevalent in 
different  circumstances.    On  the  other  hand,  a  person  with gnãn 
understands the   predominance   of   various   factors   based   on   the 
circumstances. 
 
21.13
 “In fact, it is Bhagvãn who is the inspirer of everything – of desh, kãl, 
karma, and mãyã.  It is He Himself who allows the factors of desh, kãl, 
karma,   and mãyã,   to   be   predominant.      Therefore,   they   are   all 
dependent upon Bhagvãn – just as the shishumãr chakra is dependent 
on  the  support  of  the  Dhruv  star;  and  just  as  all  the  subjects  of  a 
kingdom  are  dependent  on  their  king.    Furthermore,  in  a  kingdom, 
the minister and secretaries can only do as much as their king allows 
them to do; when the king does not allow it, they cannot do even the 
smallest  of  tasks.    In  the  same  way,  the  factors  of desh, kãl, karma, 
and mãyã can  only  do  as  much  as Bhagvãn allows  them  to  do;  they 
cannot do a single thing against the wish of Bhagvãn.  Therefore, only 
Bhagvãn is the all-doer.” 
 
21.14
 After delivering this talk, Shreeji Mahãrãj returned to the darbãr. 
 
21.15
 Later that night, Shreeji Mahãrãj went to the residence of the sãdhus.  
All  the sãdhus bowed  down  to  Him  and  paid  their  respects.    Shreeji 
Mahãrãj then said to the munis, “I have had a thought, which is why I 
have  come  to  you  at  this  hour.    In  my  mind,  I  understand  that 

GADHADÃ II 
- 493 - 
whoever  owns  land  and  money,  is  the  most  unhappy;  and  whoever 
has very little money and no land, is the most happy.  
 
21.16
 “I have built a mandir in  Amdãvãd  Nagar,  and  others  will  also  be 
built.    However,  a  person  should  not  unwilling  donate  money  to  for 
mandirs to be built.  It is the wish of Shree Nar-Nãrãyan if the mandir 
is  built  or  not.    However,  we  should  do  whatever  does  not  cause 
problems for the mandir. 
 
21.17
 “Some festivals, like Janamãshtmi, are celebrated using millions of 
rupees,  due  to  the  grace of Shree  Nar-Nãrãyan.    Sometimes, festivals 
are  celebrated  using  a tulsi leaf.    The  best  way  is  whatever  occurs 
without difficulty.  However, a person should never ask for money for 
the mandir.  Due to a person’s shraddhã in Shree Nar-Nãrãyan, if they 
wish  to  donate  their  land,  they  should  do  so  willingly.    A  person 
should not forcefully ask for anything.” 
 
21.18
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  happily  asked  the sãdhu a question, “Who do 
we call an ekãntik bhakta?” 
 
21.19
 Muktãnand  Swãmi  tried  to  answer  the  question,  but  was  unable  to 
give a satisfactory answer. 
 
21.20
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “A true ekãntik bhakta sees  himself  as 
brahm-rup,   who   strictly   follows   his   own dharma and   performs 
bhakti,  regularly  performs dhyãn and smaran of Bhagvãn,  and  also 
keeps upãsanã of Bhagvãn.      He   makes   sure   that   there   are   no 
alterations  in  the vartmãns followed  by  the  body,  which  have  been 
given  by Bhagvãn.    A  person  with  all  these  qualities  should  be 
regarded as an ekãntik bhakta. 
 
21.21
 “Also, when there is a lack of bhakti on  earth, bhakti remains  within 
Nar-Nãrãyan.    Shree   Nar-Nãrãyan behaves   just   like   the ekãntik 
bhakta to  teach  the bhaktas who  come  to His  feet.   Ekãntik bhaktas 

GADHADÃ II 
- 494 - 
like this are only found in satsang.  In other sects, there is upãsanã of 
Bhagvãn,  but  there  is  no tyãg and ãtmã-gnãn;  in  some  sects  there  is 
ãtmã-gnãn, but no upãsanã and tyãg; in some sects there is tyãg, but 
no upãsanã and ãtmã-gnãn.    However,  at  this  time  in  our satsang, 
there are many bhaktas with all these qualities.”   
 
21.22
 After deliviering this talk, Shreeji Mahãrãj returned to His residence. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 21 || 154 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 22 
Two Armies 
The Installation Of Nar-Nãrãyan Dev  
 
22.1
 In the Samvat year 1878, on Fãgan vad 10 [19
th
 March 1822], Shreeji 
Mahãrãj  awoke  in  the  middle  of  the  night  and  sat  facing  south  on  a 
decorated  bedstead  in front  of  the mandir of Shree Vãsudev-Nãrãyan 
in  Dãdã  Khãchar's darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in 
white clothes.  He called all the sãdhus and haribhaktas together, and 
so they gathered before Him in a sabhã. 
 
22.2
 Addressing the sãdhus, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “I wish to talk, so please 
listen.    When  two  armies  are  prepared  for  combat  and  both  have 
implanted  their  flags  opposite  each  other,  in  their  minds  both  feel, 
‘We  will  capture  their  flag  and  shall  raise  our  own  in  its  place’.  
However,  they  never  think, ‘Along the way to the enemy’s flag  many 
heads will roll, and rivers of blood will flow’.    In  this  way,  they  are 
never  afraid.    This  is  because  those  who  are  brave  are  not  afraid  of 
dying.    However,  a  coward  has  thousands  of  thoughts  of  fleeing.    He 
also thinks, ‘If our army wins, we shall steal the wealth and weapons of 
our opponents’.    In  comparison,  the  brave  soldiers  of  both  kings  are 
not  afraid  of  dying,  and  nor  do  they  have  greedy  motives  to  steal.  
Instead,  they  have  only  one  desire – to capture the opponent’s flag 
and ensure their own victory.   

GADHADÃ II 
- 495 - 
22.3
 “Now, in this example, the flag represents the dhãm of Bhagvãn,  and 
the   brave   soldiers   of   the   kings   represent   that   loyal bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn.    Regardless  of  whether  they  encounter  honours  or  insults 
in  this  world;  regardless  of  whether they  encounter  bodily  comforts 
or  miseries;  regardless  of  whether  their  bodies  remain  healthy  or 
unhealthy;  and  regardless  of  whether  their  bodies  survive  or  die, 
loyal bhaktas of Bhagvãn never have weak thoughts such as, ‘We will 
suffer this much pain’, or ‘We will enjoy this much happiness’.  Neither 
of these two types of thoughts arise within their minds.  Such bhaktas 
firmly  believe, ‘We want to attain the dhãm of Bhagvãn within this 
very  lifetime;  we  do  not  want  to  become  tempt  by  anything  along  the 
way’. 
 
22.4
 “On the other hand, a bhakta of Bhagvãn who identifies himself with 
the  body  is  represented  by  the  coward  soldiers.    While  worshipping 
Bhagvãn, he has thousands of weak thoughts such as, ‘If the vartmãn 
become  strict,  I  will  not  be  able  to  survive;  only  if  they  are  easy  to 
follow will I be able to survive’.  He also thinks, ‘If I employ this method, 
I shall be happy even in worldly life.  Also, if it is possible, I shall survive 
passively in satsang’.  Such a bhakta represents the coward.  However, 
a  loyal  and  brave bhakta of Bhagvãn never  has  any  types  of  desires 
related to the body or the world.” 
 
22.5
 Having said this, Shreeji Mahãrãj then began to narrate an experience 
of His own.  “When I went to Amdãvãd to install the murti of Shree 
Nar-Nãrãyan   Dev,  thousands  of  people  gathered  for  the  festival.  
Following  the  completion  of  the  installation  of Shree  Nar-Nãrãyan 
Dev, and after thousands of brãhmans from Amdãvãd had been fed, I 
departed from there and spent the night in Jetalpur.  There, I began to 
think, ‘I want to forget all memories of all of those people and all the 
activities I saw’.    In  doing  this,  I  felt  intense  grief  in  my  heart.    As  a 
result,  I  became  ill.    From  there,  I  went  to  Dholkã, where  I spent  the 
night.    Then,  walking  from  Dholkã  with  the  same  thought  in  mind,  I 
reached  the  forest  of  Ganesh  Dholkã  near  the  village  of  Koth  and 

GADHADÃ II 
- 496 - 
spent the night there.  I began to think so much that I forgot all about 
my  body.    While  thinking,  I  forgot  all  the  activities,  and  dispelled  all 
those thoughts in such a way that it was as if  I had not even stayed at 
Lake  Kãnkariã,  and  as  if  there  had  been  no  festival;  no  thoughts 
remained at all. 
 
22.6
 “After those worldly thoughts had subsided, I began to look within.  I 
began  to  see alokik powers  and  also  the  pleasures  of  the devs.    I 
began  to  see  countless  types  of  heavenly  vehicles, apsãrãs,  clothes, 
and  jewellery – just  as  if  I  were  seeing  them  here  in  Mrutyu-Lok.  
However,   in   my   heart   I   did   not   like   anything   except Bhagvãn.  
Moreover, just as the panch-vishays here appear to be insignificant to 
me – with my mind never being tempted – in the same way, my mind 
was not tempted anywhere from Dev-Lok all the way to Brahm-Lok. 
 
22.7
 “Seeing this, all the devs began to praise me, ‘You truly are an ekãntik 
bhakta of Bhagvãn; after all, your mind did not abandon Bhagvãn and 
become tempted elsewhere’.  On hearing their words, my heart gained 
a  lot  of courage.   I  then told my man, ‘I know your true svarup.  So, if 
you  have  a  thought  about  any  object  other  than  Bhagvãn,  I  will  crush 
you to pieces’.  In  the  same  way,  I  told  my buddhi, ‘If you have any 
belief  other  than  that  of  Bhagvãn,  then  you  will  be  in  trouble’.  
Similarly,  I  told  my chitt, ‘If you think about anything other than 
Bhagvãn, then I will also crush you to pieces’.  In the same way, I told 
my ahankãr, ‘If  you  have  any  form  of  arrogance  except  that  of 
servitude towards Bhagvãn, I will destroy you’. 
 
22.8
 “Following  this,  just  as  I  had  totally  forgotten  all  the  objects  of  this 
lok,  I  also  totally  forgot  all  the  objects  of  Dev-lok  and  Brahm-Lok.  
When all of those thoughts were dispelled, the illness that had arisen 
as  a  result  of  those  thoughts  also  disappeared.    Therefore,  a  person 
who  is  a bhakta of Bhagvãn should behave in this way.”  Shreeji 
Mahãrãj  narrated  His  own  experiences  for  the  sake  of  the kalyãn of 
His bhaktas,  while  in  reality;  He  Himself  is  the pratyaksha svarup of 
Shree Krishna Purushottam Nãrãyan. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 497 - 
22.9
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “The Vãsudev Mahãtmya describes the 
dharma of an ekãntik bhakta as follows:  ‘An ekãntik bhakta does not 
believe  his  body  to  be  his  own  true  svarup;  he  believes  himself  to  be 
composed   of   chaitanya.      He   performs   bhakti   of Bhagvãn   while 
observing svadharma, gnãn, and vairãgya.  Also, he maintains no desire 
for any object other than Bhagvãn’.  When  he  becomes  such  a sãdhu 
by  worshipping Bhagvãn in  this  way,  there  is  no  greater  status.    For 
example, in a kingdom, the queen’s authority is equal to that of the 
king.    In  the  same  way,  that sãdhu possesses  as  much  majesty  as 
Bhagvãn.    Therefore,  a sãdhu should  not  wish  for  the  insignificant 
pleasures of worldly life.  This is because when that sãdhu attains the 
dhãm of Bhagvãn,  then  just  as  the  lords  of  countless  millions  of 
brahmãnds bring countless types of gifts for Bhagvãn, they also bring 
them  for  that sãdhu.    Moreover,  by  the  grace  of Bhagvãn,  that sãdhu 
acquires alokik powers and strength.  Keeping such a great thought in 
the  mind,  a  person  should  not  desire  anything  other  than Bhagvãn.  
For  example,  a  person  who  has  obtained  a chintãmani should  look 
after  it  with  great  care.    This  is  because  it will  enable  him  to  obtain 
any object he desires.  Similarly, a bhakta of Bhagvãn should hold on 
to  the chintãmani in  the  form  of Bhagvãn’s murti;  he  should  never 
abandon it.  Only then will he attain everything.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 22 || 154 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 23 
Heat And Frost 
 
23.1
 In  the Samvat year  1878,  on   Jyeshth sud 11  [31
st
 May  1822],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  in  front  of  the mandir of 
Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He 
was wearing a white khes and had also covered Himself with a white 
chãdar.  He had tied a white pãgh around His head.  A sabhã of munis, 
as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 498 - 
23.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Today, I thought about the nature of the 
mind.    It  appears  that  the  mind  is  not  separate  from  the jeev;  it  is  a 
reflection  of  the jeev itself,  but  not  separate  from  it.    I  also  observed 
that the nature of the mind is like the heat of summer and the frost of 
winter.  Just as a person can die from heat or frost, in the same way, 
when  the  mind  travels  towards  the vishays via  the indriyas,  if  those 
vishays are full of miseries, the mind becomes ‘hot’ like the heat of 
summer;  and  if  those vishays are  full  of  happiness,  then  the  mind 
becomes ‘cold’ like the frost of winter.  Specifically, when the mind – 
having  indulged  in  those vishays which  are  full  of misery and having 
become ‘hot’ like the scorching winds of summer heat – enters  a 
person’s heart, it makes the person  extremely  miserable  and  forces 
him  to  fall  from  the  path of kalyãn.    Such  a  person  should  be  known 
to  have  died  from  the  effects  of  heat.    When  the  mind – having 
indulged  in  the  pleasures  of  those vishays that  are  full  of  happiness 
and having become ‘cold’ like frost – enters a person’s heart, it makes 
that  person  satisfied,  and  causes  him  to  fall  from  the  path  of kalyãn.  
He should be known to have died due to frost. 
 
23.3
 “However, a person whose mind remains unmoved – it  does  not 
become  ‘hot’  upon   experiencing   repulsive vishays and   does   not 
become ‘cold’ upon experiencing pleasurable vishays – should  be 
known as a param-bhãgvat sant.  However, it is no small achievement 
to develop the mind in this way. 
 
23.4
 “Moreover, the mind is like a child.  If  a  child  attempts  to  grasp  a 
snake,  or  touch  a  flame,  or  perhaps  hold  an  unsheathed  sword,  it 
becomes  upset  when  it  is  not  allowed  to  do  so;  and  even  if  it  is 
allowed  to  do  so,  it  will  be  hurt  and  upset.    Similarly,  if  the  mind  is 
not  allowed  to  indulge  in  them,  it  turns  away  from Bhagvãn,  and 
becomes extremely miserable.  Therefore, only a person whose mind 
has a craving for Bhagvãn and which becomes neither ‘hot’ nor ‘cold’ 
by the vishays, should be known as a sãdhu.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 23 || 156 || 

GADHADÃ II 
- 499 - 
Gadhadã II – 24 
Firmness In Sãnkhya And In Yog 
 
24.1
 In  the Samvat year  1879,  on Shrãvan sud 8  [26
th
 July  1822],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  arrived  at  Lakshmi-Vãdi  on  horseback 
from Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  There, He sat on a platform 
facing  north.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    He  was 
wearing  a  garland  of mogrã flowers  around  His  neck,  and a  tassel  of 
mogrã flowers was also inserted in His pãgh.  A sabhã of paramhans, 
as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
24.2
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked Shreeji Mahãrãj, “Mahãrãj, does a 
bhakta who  has  firm  belief  in Bhagvãn experience  any  obstacles,  or 
not?” 
 
24.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A bhakta may  be  firm  in  two  ways:    One  is 
by  being  firm  in yog,  and  the  other  is  by  being  firm  in sãnkhya.    Of 
these, a bhakta who is firm in yog keeps his vrutti constantly fixed on 
the svarup of Bhagvãn.  A bhakta who is firm in sãnkhya understands 
the extent of human pleasures, as well as the extent of the pleasures 
of  the  great yogis, chãrans, vidyãdhars, gandharvas,  and devs.    In 
addition, he considers the pleasures of the fourteen loks and believes, 
‘These pleasures are only so much’.    He  also  considers  the  miseries 
that   follow   those   pleasures.      As   a   result,   he   develops vairãgya 
towards  those  misery-filled  pleasures,  and  maintains  profound  love 
only for Bhagvãn.  So, a person who is firm in sãnkhya possesses the 
strength of understanding. 
 
24.4
 “In comparison, the strength of a person who  is  firm  in yog is  based 
only on keeping his vrutti constantly on the svarup of Bhagvãn.  If he 
were     to     encounter     some     disturbances     due     to     unpleasant 
circumstances,   then   although   his vrutti was   originally   fixed   on 
Bhagvãn’s svarup, it would become attached elsewhere as well.  This 
is because a person who is firm in yog somewhere lacks the strength 
of  understanding.    Therefore,  it  is  possible  that  such  a bhakta may 
experience obstacles. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 500 - 
24.5
 “However, if a person is firm in both sãnkhya and yog,  then  there 
would be no problem whatsoever.  Such a bhakta of Bhagvãn is never 
tempted by any other object than the murti of Bhagvãn.  He realises, 
‘With the exception of Bhagvãn’s Akshardhãm, and Bhagvãn’s murti 
and the bhaktas within Akshardhãm, everything else – all the loks, the 
devs,  and  the  wealth  of  the  devs – is perishable’.    Realising  this,  he 
maintains  profound  love  only  for Bhagvãn.    Such  a bhakta never 
experiences any sort of obstacles whatsoever.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 24 || 157 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 25 
A Tyãgi With Worldly Desires, And A Grahastha With No Desires 
 
25.1
 In the Samvat year 1879, on Shrãvan vad 6 [8
th
 August 1822], Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on 
the veranda outside the south-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr 
in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of 
munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from various  places,  had  gathered 
before Him. 
 
25.2
 Addressing all the paramhans, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Please listen, as 
I wish to ask you a question.  First, suppose there is a tyãgi bhakta of 
Bhagvãn who  is  strict  in  following  the  physical vartmãn.    However, 
within  his  heart,  he  has  an  intense  desire  to  indulge  in  the vishays.  
Nevertheless, he does not physically give in to those desires.  Such is 
the tyãgi.  There is another bhakta who is a grahastha.  Physically, he 
has  close  contact  with  both  women  and  wealth.    However,  in  his 
heart, he is free of all worldly desires.  So, the question is what will be 
their  fate  after  death?    Will  they  both  attain  the  same  state?    Or  will 
one  become  superior  to  the  other?    Please  consider  the  differences 
between the two and give an answer for each separately. 
 
25.3
 Then,  Gopãlãnand  Swãmi  replied,  “When  the tyãgi passes  away, 
because  of  the  intense  desires  in  his  heart  to  indulge  in  the vishays, 

GADHADÃ II 
- 501 - 
Bhagvãn will  make  him  a  wealthy grahastha either  in  this  Mrutyu-
Lok  or  in  Dev-Lok,  where  he  will  attain  a  great  amount  of vishays to 
indulge in.  In fact, in Dev-Lok, he will indulge in vishays like those of 
a person who had strayed from his spiritual activities as described in 
the Bhagvad Geetã. 
 
25.4
 “On the other hand, when the grahastha bhakta passes away, because 
he  is  free  of  worldly  desires,  he  will  attain  the dhãm of Bhagvãn – 
Brahmpur – where he will reside at the holy feet of Bhagvãn. 
 
25.5
 “As far as the tyãgi is  concerned,  when  he  becomes  satisfied  after 
indulging in the vishays, he will eventually develop vairãgya towards 
them;  and  then,  feeling  guilty  in  his  mind,  he  will  engage  in  the 
worship  of Bhagvãn.    Then,  he  will  become  free  of  worldly  desires 
and attain the dhãm of Bhagvãn.” 
 
25.6
 Hearing this, Shreeji Mahãrãj commented, “Correct.  That is the exact 
answer to the question.” 
 
25.7
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “If a person has such strong worldly 
desires  and  wishes  to  eradicate  them,  by  which  method  can  they  be 
eradicated?” 
 
25.8
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Just as Ukã Khãchar has become addicted to 
serving the sãdhus, in the same way, if a person becomes addicted to 
serving Bhagvãn and His sant to the extent that he would not be able 
to stay for even a moment without serving them, then all the impure 
desires in his antah-karans will be destroyed.” 
 
25.9
 Then, Svayamprakãshãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, by which means 
is Bhagvãn extremely pleased?” 
 
25.10
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If a bhakta who  once  had  only  twenty 
kilograms of grains in his house were to attain the control of a village, 
or  the  control  of  five  villages,  or  the  control  of  fifty  villages,  or  the 

GADHADÃ II 
- 502 - 
control  of  one  hundred  villages,  or  even  the  control  of  the  entire 
world;  and  after  this, if  he  remains  just  as  loving  and  humble  with  a 
sant as he was when he was poor and modest, and if he remains just 
as  humble  even  if  he  were  to  attain  the  kingdom  of  Indra-Lok  and 
Brahm-Lok, then Bhagvãn would be extremely pleased upon him. 
 
25.11
 “As for a tyãgi, even after attaining powers similar to those possessed 
by Bhagvãn, if he can continue to serve all sãdhus in exactly the same 
way as he did when he was new and timid, and not attempt to impose 
his  authority  upon  other sãdhus or  try  to  compete  with  them,  then 
Bhagvãn would be extremely pleased with him.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 25 || 158 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 26 
Obstactles Of Bhakti 
That Which Displeases Bhagvãn Should Not Be Done 
 
26.1
 In  the  Samvat  year  1879,  on  the  night  of Bhãdarvã sud 11  [29
th
 
August  1822],  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  in  front  of  the mandir of 
Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He 
was dressed entirely in white clothes.  A sabhã of paramhans, as well 
as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
26.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “A bhakta of Bhagvãn should  never  do 
anything that displeases Bhagvãn and His bhaktas, and he should also 
abandon all those who obstruct him in worshipping Bhagvãn, even if 
they are his own relatives.  Also, just as a person abandons an enemy, 
he   should   abandon   any svabhãv that   does   not   please Bhagvãn.  
Furthermore, he should never support those who are vimukhs, just as 
Bharatji  did  not  support his  own mother.   Also,  a bhakta of Bhagvãn 
should mainly perceive avgun in himself.  On the other hand, a person 
who  perceives avgun in  others  and  only gun in  himself,  may  be 
known as a satsangi, but he should be known to be half-fallen. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 503 - 
26.3
 “Furthermore, for a bhakta of Bhagvãn, if gnãn of the ãtmã, vairãgya, 
or dharma are  an  obstacle  in  his bhakti towards Bhagvãn,  then  he 
should suppress even them and maintain the predominance of bhakti 
only.  However, if they are supportive in offering bhakti, then they are 
fine.    Only  a  person  who  has  this  understanding  can  be  called  a 
complete bhakta of Bhagvãn. 
 
26.4
 “Also, no matter how great he may be, if a person perceives avgun in 
others  and gun in  himself,  he  will  certainly  encounter  obstacles  on 
the path of kalyãn.  For example, Rãdhikãji was great and she also had 
intense  love  for Bhagvãn.    However,  when  she  perceived gun in 
herself  and avgun in Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn,  a  trace  of tamo-gun 
entered  into  her  love  for  Him.    Then,  she  quarrelled  with Shree 
Krishna Bhagvãn and  Shreedãmã.   As  a  result  of  this,  Shreedãmã 
cursed her.  Rãdhikãji then fell from Golok, and took birth in the home 
of  a  carpenter.    She  had  to  marry  a  man  other  than Bhagvãn,  and 
suffered   a   severe   disgrace.      Even   Shreedãmã   perceived gun in 
himself,  and  perceived avgun in Rãdhikãji.    For  that  reason,  he  was 
cursed by Rãdhikãji and had to become a demon. 
 
26.5
 “However, this is not the way of falling from the dhãm of Bhagvãn; for 
those  who  have  fallen  have  done  so  due  to Bhagvãn’s will.    After  all, 
Bhagvãn has declared, ‘Even a person who is as great as Rãdhikãji will 
fall  if  he  perceives  gun  in  himself  and  perceives  avgun  in  bhaktas  of 
Bhagvãn.  If that is so, what can be said of others?’  Therefore, a bhakta 
of Bhagvãn should see  only gun in  all satsangis and  should  find only 
avgun in himself.  If a person has such an understanding, then even if 
he  is  not  very  intelligent,  his satsang still  becomes  stronger  day  by 
day.    Without  it,  even  if  he  is  very  intelligent,  he  will  fall  back  from 
satsang; and in the end will certainly become a vimukh. 
 
26.6
 “Also, the following practice is observed everywhere:  When a king or 
a guru lectures and disciplines a servant or a shishya, if the servant or 
shishya accepts   it   positively,   then   the   king   or   the guru has 

GADHADÃ II 
- 504 - 
tremendous  affection  for him.    However,  they  do  not  feel  affection 
towards  a  person  who  reacts  negatively  when  given  such  advice.  
Bhagvãn’s method  is  similar.    When  He  gives  advice  to  someone,  if 
they  accept  it  positively,  He  develops  affection  for  them;  and  if  they 
react negatively, He does not develop affection for them.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 26 || 159 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 27 
Mandirs Built For Bhakti And Upãsanã 
 
27.1
 In  the Samvat year  1879,  on Kãrtik sud 11  [25
th
 November  1822], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   the   veranda 
outside the south-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  
He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A  garland  of  white  and 
yellow guldãvadi flowers  adorned  His  neck,  and  tassels  hung  from 
both sides of His pãgh.  A sabhã of paramhans as well as haribhaktas 
from various places had gathered before Him. 
 
27.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked Muktãnand Swãmi, “What causes krodh 
to arise within you?  Also, how much of that cause does it take for you 
to become angry?  As for me, even if someone spends anything from 
one  to  one  hundred  thousand  rupees,  I  would  not  become  angry  for 
my  own  sake.    However,  if  someone  disobeys  his  own dharma,  or  if 
an arrogant person abuses a humble person, or if someone sides with 
injustice, then for the sake of another person, I do become angry for a 
brief  moment;  but  never  do  I  become  angry  for  my  own  sake.    Even 
when  I  do  express krodh for  the  sake  of  another  person,  it  does  not 
last for even a second, nor is any grudge formed.  So, my question to 
you   is   what   causes krodh to   arise   within   you   and   how   is   it 
eradicated?” 
 
27.3
 Muktãnand Swãmi relied, “Krodh arises due to association with some 
objects or on seeing evil in a person; but it subsides instantly.” 

GADHADÃ II 
- 505 - 
27.4
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked,  “By  what  thought  process  do  you 
manage to do that?” 
  
27.5
 Muktãnand Swãmi replied, “First, by thinking of Bhagvãn’s greatness, 
I  realise, ‘I do not wish to retain any  svabhãvs  that  would  displease 
Bhagvãn’.    Secondly,  after  examining  the  path  of sãdhus like  Shukji 
and Jadbharat, I think, ‘Such an inappropriate svabhãv does not suit a 
sãdhu’.” 
 
27.6
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj commented, “Such a thought that is capable of 
repelling the force of kãm and krodh, is beyond the gun of Mãyã, and 
it is firm in your jeev.  In fact, such thoughts that repel the influence of 
kãm and krodh are  due  to  the sanskãrs of  past  lives.    Also,  regarding 
your nature, I know this much:  Initially, you may become attached to 
worldly  objects  that  you  come  across,  but  in  the  end,  you  do  not 
remain attached to them; you are capable of breaking that bondage.” 
 
27.7
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi questioned, “Why does the deficiency of 
becoming influenced in the first place still remain?” 
 
27.8
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Each of the eight factors of desh, kãl, kriyã, 
sang, dhyãn, mantra, dikshã,  and shãstra, has  a  force  equal  to  that  of 
the  past sanskãrs.    Therefore,  when  a  person  encounters  them,  they 
overpower the force of the past sanskãrs.  After all, if good deeds and 
bad deeds are performed only by the influence of a person’s sanskãrs, 
then  all  the  distinctions  of vidhi and nishedh – ‘This should be done 
and this should not be done’ – as  prescribed  in  the  Veds,  the  six-
shãstras,  and  the  Purãns,  would  become  meaningless.    But,  these 
shãstras,  which  have  been  written  by  the  great,  can  never  become 
false. 
 
27.9
 “Just see, Jay and Vijay behaved improperly, and as a result they fell 
from the dhãm of Bhagvãn, where there is no influence of Kãl, karma, 
or Mãyã.    On  the  other  hand,  Prahlãd  pleased Nãradji and  therefore, 
even  though  circumstances  were  unpleasant,  they  were  unable  to 

GADHADÃ II 
- 506 - 
obstruct him.  However, even though circumstances were pleasant in 
Jay  and  Vijay’s case, because the Sanakãdik were  angered,  Jay  and 
Vijay fell from the dhãm of Bhagvãn.  Therefore, a person who wishes 
to  attain kalyãn should  do  whatever  pleases  the  great sant.    Such  a 
sant becomes pleased when there are no traces of impure desires left 
within a person’s heart. 
 
27.10
 “A person should keep in mind, that a person who has krodh and 
other  vicious  natures  towards  a  humble  person,  will  develop  such 
feelings  towards  the  great,  and  then  also  towards  his ishta-dev.  
Therefore,  a  person  wishing to  attain kalyãn should  not  have  any 
vicious  feelings  towards  anyone;  and  if  he  does,  then  he  is  sure  to 
develop  hatred  towards bhaktas of Bhagvãn,  and  then  eventually 
towards Bhagvãn as well. 
 
27.11
 “That  is  why  if  I  have  upset  even  one  humble  person,  I think, 
‘Bhagvãn resides as antaryãmi in all.  While staying in one place, He 
knows what is in everyone’s heart.  So, since He must also be present in 
the heart of the person whom I have upset, I have offended Bhagvãn as 
well’.    Realising  this,  I  bow  down  to  him,  give  him  whatever  he 
wishes, and do whatever is necessary to please him.” 
 
27.12
 Having said this, Shreeji Mahãrãj continued, “I have thought and 
realised  that  if  a  person  maintains  too  much tyãg or  too  much 
compassion,   then   he   cannot   offer bhakti towards Bhagvãn,   and 
therefore  causing  him  to  betray  his upãsanã.    For  example,  from  the 
past,  we  notice  that upãsanã eventually  perished  in  those  who  were 
extreme tyãgis.   Therefore,  having  thought  about  this,  and  for  the 
sake of preserving upãsanã, I have relaxed the emphasis on tyãg and 
have built mandirs of Bhagvãn.  So, even if only a little tyãg remains, 
upãsanã will  at  least  be  preserved,  and  through  it,  many jeevs will 
attain kalyãn. 
 
27.13
 “On the other hand, how is it possible for a person who wishes to 
offer bhakti to Bhagvãn to retain compassion like that of Jain sãdhus?  

GADHADÃ II 
- 507 - 
After  all,  a bhakta is  required  to  pick  flowers  and tulsi for Bhagvãn; 
he  is  required  to  bring  various  types  of  vegetables,  and  to  grow 
gardens  for Bhagvãn;  he  must  also  build mandirs.    Therefore,  a 
person  who  sits  idly,  maintaining  extreme tyãg and  compassion,  is 
unable  to  offer bhakti to Bhagvãn.    When bhakti diminishes,  the 
upãsanã of Bhagvãn is   also   destroyed,   and   a   lineage   of   blind 
followers  results.    That  is  why  I  have  had mandirs built – for  the 
purpose of preserving Bhagvãn’s upãsanã forever. 
 
27.14
 “Moreover, a bhakta with upãsanã never  deviates  from  his dharma.  
Therefore,  my  principle  is  to  perform  the bhakti and upãsanã of 
Bhagvãn while maintaining dharma.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 27 || 160 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 28 
Serving A Bhakta Pleases Bhagvan 
 
28.1
 In  the Samvat year  1879,  on Fãgan sud 2  [13
th
 February,  1823], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  facing  west  on  a 
square  platform  at  His  residence  in  Dãdã  Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Gadhadã.  He was wearing a white khes and had covered Himself with 
a  white chãdar.    He  had  also  tied  a  white pãgh around  His  head.    A 
sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had 
gathered before Him. 
 
28.2
 Then,  Prãgji  Davé  said,  “There  is  no shãstra like   the   Shreemad 
Bhãgvat.”  
 
28.3
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “Yes,  the  Shreemad Bhãgvat  is  certainly 
good,  but  there  is  no shãstra like  the  Vãsudev  Mahãtmya,  which  is  a 
part of the Skand Purãn.  After all, in that shãstra, great emphasis has 
been placed on dharma, bhakti, gnãn, and vairãgya, as well as ahinsã.” 

GADHADÃ II 
- 508 - 
28.4
 Having  said  this,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  continued, “The Vãlmiki Rãmãyan 
and  Harivansh  have  placed  great  emphasis  on hinsã.    In  fact,  even 
Rãmchandraji behaved according to the characteristics of a kshatriya.  
Even  though Rãmchandraji protected  anyone  who  sought  refuge  at 
His  feet,  He  would  immediately abandon  them  if  they  committed 
even  the  slightest  mistake.    For  example,  even  though Sitãji became 
subject  to  only  minor  public  criticism,  He  instantly  abandoned  her, 
even though she was very dear to him.” 
 
28.5
 Hearing this, Muktãnand Swãmi commented, “Rãmãnand Swãmi’s 
nature was similar.” 
 
28.6
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj revealed, “My nature is not like that.  I have 
great compassion for bhaktas of Bhagvãn.  Of the Pãndavs, Arjun was 
also  of  a  very  compassionate  nature.    Amongst  all  men,  there  has 
been  no  man like Rãmchandraji and  Arjun,  and  amongst  all  women 
there has been no woman like Sitãji and Draupadi. 
 
28.7
 “Now,  I  shall  describe  my  own  nature.    Even  though  I  have  a 
compassionate  nature,  if  a  person  spites bhaktas of Bhagvãn,  then  I 
have  a  dislike  towards  that  person.    If  I  hear  someone  speaking 
unpleasantly  of bhaktas,  then  I  would  not  feel  like speaking  to  them, 
even if I had to.  On the other hand, I become extremely pleased with 
someone  who  serves  the bhaktas of Bhagvãn.    In  fact,  my  nature  is 
such  that  I  do  not  become  easily  pleased  or  displeased  over  small 
matters,  but  only  after  observation  over  several  days  of  whether  a 
person is worthy of my pleasure or displeasure, do I become pleased 
or  displeased.    I  never  become  pleased  or  displeased  with  a  person 
by  simply  hearing  someone’s  opinions  of  that  person;  I  only 
appreciate  those  qualities  that  I  perceive  with  my  own  mind.    Also, 
my  preference  is  as  follows: ‘If  a  person is a  genuine bhakta of 
Bhagvãn, then I am a bhakta of that bhakta, and I do the bhakti of such 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn’.  This is my greatest quality.  A person who does 
not have that quality is not worthy of any type of greatness. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 509 - 
28.8
 “Conversely, those who have perceived avgun in bhaktas of Bhagvãn, 
even  though  they  were  very  great,  have  fallen  from  their  status  of 
importance.    Those  who  progress  do  so  only  by  serving bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn,  and  those  who  regress  do  so  only  by  spiting bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn.    In  fact,  the only  method  for  a  person  to please Bhagvãn is 
to  serve bhaktas by  thought,  word,  and  deed.    The  only  method  to 
displease Bhagvãn is to spite bhaktas. 
 
28.9
 “Therefore, my principle is that if Bhagvãn is  pleased  with me,  and  I 
have  the  company  of  the bhaktas of Bhagvãn,  then  even  if  I  were  to 
stay far away from Bhagvãn for countless years, I would not feel any 
grief mentally.  On the other hand, if Bhagvãn is not pleased with me, 
then even if I were to stay near Bhagvãn, I would not consider that to 
be good.  Moreover, the essence of all the shãstras is ‘A person should 
only do that which pleases Bhagvãn’.  In  fact,  a  person  who  does  not 
do that which pleases Bhagvãn should be known to have fallen from 
the path of Bhagvãn. 
 
28.10
 “If a person has the company of the bhaktas of Bhagvãn and also has 
earned Bhagvãn’s pleasure, then even though he is in Mrutyu-Lok, he 
is still in the dhãm of Bhagvãn.  This is because a person who serves a 
sant and  earns Bhagvãn’s favour  will  certainly  stay  near Bhagvãn.  
Conversely,  even  if  a bhakta is in  the dhãm of Bhagvãn,  if he has  not 
earned Bhagvãn’s favour  and  is  jealous  of bhaktas of Bhagvãn,  then 
that bhakta will certainly fall from that dhãm. 
 
28.11
 “For this reason, in order to please Bhagvãn,  I  desire  only  to  serve 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn in this life and all subsequent lives.  Furthermore, 
just as this is my belief, all of you should also make the same belief.” 
 
28.12
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi and all the other bhaktas folded their hands 
in prayer and said, “Mahãrãj, we also wish to keep such a belief.”  
Having   said   this,   all   the bhaktas pledged   and   bowed   at   Shreeji 
Mahãrãj’s feet. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 510 - 
28.13
 Finally, Shreeji Mahãrãj added, “I have delivered this talk to you after 
hearing  and  extracting  the  essence  from  the  Veds,  the  six-shãstras, 
the Purãns and all other words on this earth relating to moksh.  This 
is the most profound and fundamental principle, and it is the essence 
of all essences.  For all those who have previously attained moksh, for 
all  those  who  will  attain  it  in  the  future,  and  for  all  those  who  are 
presently treading the path of moksh, this talk is like a lifeline.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 28 || 162 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 29 
The Characteristics Of A Person Who Is Attached To Bhagvãn 
 
29.1
 In  the Samvat year  1879,  on Fãgan sud 8  [18
th
 February  1823], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  north-facing  rooms  of  Dada 
Khãchar's darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from various places 
had gathered before Him. 
 
29.2
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “A bhakta whose   mind   has   become 
deeply  attached  to  the svarup of Shree Krishna Bhagvãn has  the 
following characteristics: Firstly, even though they may be extremely 
exhausted after prolonged walking and do not have enough strength 
left  in  their  body  even  to  sit  upright,  if  an  opportunity  to  talk  about 
Bhagvãn arises,   then   he   becomes   attentive   and   most   willing   to 
narrate  and  hear  such  talks – as  if  he  has  not  walked  even  a  single 
mile.    Also,  regardless  of  any  disease  or  illness  that  may  be  a  source 
of  pain  for  them,  and  regardless  of  being  insulted,  if  they  hear  talks 
about Bhagvãn,  then  they  would  instantly  be  relieved  of  all  their 
miseries.    Furthermore,  they  may  appear  to  be  totally  engrossed  in 
the  wealth  and  property  they  have  attained,  but  the  moment  they 
hear  talks  of Bhagvãn,  it  would  seem  as  if  they  have  no  association 

GADHADÃ II 
- 511 - 
with  anything  else.    This  would  be  their  eagerness  to  listen  to  talks 
about Bhagvãn.    A  person  who  has  these  characteristics  should  be 
known to have developed deep attachment to Bhagvãn.” 
 
29.3
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “How does such deep attachment 
towards Bhagvãn develop?” 
 
29.4 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Either due to very strong sanskãrs from past 
lives, or  by  serving  and  therefore  pleasing  the sant of Bhagvãn who 
has  such  firm  attachment  with Bhagvãn – these  two  methods  help 
create  deep  attachment  towards Bhagvãn.    Besides  these,  there  are 
no other methods.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 29 || 162 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 30 
Women And Gold 
 
30.1 
In  the Samvat year  1879,  on sud 9  of  the second  Chaitra [19
th
 April 
1823],  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress 
with  a  large, cylindrical  pillow  on  the  veranda  outside  the mandir of 
Shree Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He 
was  wearing  a  white khes and  had  covered  Himself  with  a  white 
chãdar.    He  had  tied  a  black-bordered  cloth  around  His  head,  and  a 
tassel of flowers was hanging from His pãgh.  He was also wearing a 
garland  of  flowers  around  His  neck.    A sabhã of sãdhus,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
30.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “The Shreemad Bhãgvat and the other 
sacred shãstras are satya;  so  reality  reflects  what  is  stated  in  those 
shãstras.  Just see, in the Shreemad Bhãgvat, it is said that Kali (Kali-
Yug) resides in gold; and for that reason, I do not like even the sight 
of  gold.    Also,  like  gold,  beauty  is  a  source  of  attachment.    After  all, 

GADHADÃ II 
- 512 - 
when  a  beautiful  woman  enters a sabhã,  even  the  most  composed 
person  cannot  remain  without  being  drawn  towards  her  beauty.  
Therefore, gold and women are the source of extreme attachment. 
 
30.3
 “A person does not become attached to gold and women when he 
realises the pure chaitanya brahm as the only satya; when he realises 
that brahm to  be  his  own  self;  when  he  becomes brahm-rup and 
worships Shree Krishna Bhagvãn, who is Parbrahm; when he realises 
Prakruti and all the entities which have evolved from it – all of which 
are  below Brahm – as  being asatya,  perishable,  and  worthless;  and 
when  he  views  all mãyik names  and  forms  as  flawed  and  develops 
intense vairãgya towards  all  those  names  and  forms.    Only  under 
these  conditions  do  gold  and  women  not  bind  a  person;  otherwise, 
they most certainly will cause a person to become bound by them.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 30 || 163 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 31 
Jeev, Ishvar, Mãyã, Brahm, Parbrahm 
 
31.1
 In  the Samvat year  1880,  on Shrãvan sud 4  [10
th
 August  1823], 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress  with  a  large,  cylindrical 
pillow that had been placed on a square platform at His residence in 
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was dressed entirely in white 
clothes.  He had also tied a black-bordered cloth around His head.  A 
sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places  had 
gathered  before  Him.    At  that  time,  the  Kapil  Geetã  (a  section  of  the 
Shreemad Bhãgvat) was being read by the Prãgji Davé. 
 
31.2 
Following   the   reading,   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   said   to   the paramhans, 
“Vãsudev Bhagvãn – who is Purushottam, the cause of all causes, and 
who  is  greater  than Akshar – implants  masculine  power  in Mahã-
Mãyã through Mahã-Purush.    That Purush is  like Akshar,  he  is  a 

GADHADÃ II 
- 513 - 
mukta,  and  he  is  also  known as Brahm.    When  that Purush implants 
his masculine power in Mãyã, Virãt-Purush is said to be the son of its 
respective Purush.    Just  as  a brãhman,  a kshatriya,  a vaishya, or 
another  man  of  this  world  produces  a  son  with  his  wife,  similarly, 
Virãt-Purush is also produced. 
 
31.3 
“That Virãt-Purush is  just  like  this jeev,  and  his  actions  are  also 
similar to the jeev.  The lifespan of that Virãt-Purush is two parãrdhs.  
The  creation,  sustenance,  and  destruction  of  this  universe  are  his 
three states, just as jãgrat, svapna, and sushupti are the three states of 
the jeev.   Virãt, sutrãtmã,  and avyãkrut are  the  three  bodies  of  that 
Virãt-Purush.  These bodies, which are encircled by the eight barriers 
(jad  prakruti),  have  been  produced  from  the  twenty-four tattvas. 
 
31.4 
“The indriyas,  antah-karans, and  their  presiding devs entered  that 
Virãt and attempted to awaken him.  Despite Virat’s jeev being inside 
his  body, Virãt still  did  not  awaken.    Only  when Vãsudev Bhagvãn – 
the kshetragna – entered  within  him  in  the svarup of Purush did  the 
body of Virãt awaken.  Only then did Virãt-Purush become capable of 
performing all his activities. 
 
31.5 
“To inspire the jeev,  that  same Bhagvãn – while  remaining  beyond 
Mãyã in  the  form  of sushupti – resides  in  the jeev as  its  witness.  
However,  the jeev has  been  associated  with  the  body,  the indriyas, 
and the vishays.  As a result of this improper association, the jeev has 
become one  with  the  body,  and  the indriyas.    After  abandoning  their 
association, the jeev realises, ‘My self is brahm, which is transcendental 
and free from mãyã.’  If  a  person  associates  with brahm through 
continuous thinking in this way, the jeev acquires the qualities of that 
brahm.  However, it is a great fault of the jeev that even after hearing 
this fact, it cannot maintain constant remembrance that it is brahm.   
 
31.6 
“In this way, the inspirer of both the ishvar (Virãt-Purush) and of this 
jeev is Purushottam – also  known  as Vãsudev – in  the svarup of 

GADHADÃ II 
- 514 - 
Purush.    Like  the jeev,  that Virãt-Purush is  also  bound  by mãyã;  and 
remains  bound  until  he  completes  his  lifespan  of  two parãrdhs.  
When he dies, he gets direct contact with that Purush.  This is because 
his  father  (Purush)  is  powerful  and  cares  for  him  appropriately.    So, 
because Virãt-Purush is attached to Mãyã, he is again produced from 
Mãyã at the end of destruction. 
 
31.7 
“Moreover, just as the jeev is  bound and  powerless,  in  the same  way 
its father is also bound and powerless.  Then, how can the father help 
the  son?   Therefore,  the jeev remains  continuously  attached  to mãyã 
in the form of sushupti.  However, that attachment is never broken.  It 
is only broken when a person constantly associates with his inspirer 
(brahm), through thinking – as previously described. 
 
31.8 
“Also, Virãt-Purush worships Sankarshan, Aniruddha, and Pradyumna.  
Specifically, during the state of destruction, he worships Sankarshan; 
during  the  state  of  sustenance,  he  worships Pradyumna;  and  during 
the  state  of  creation,  he  worships Aniruddha.    In  fact, Sankarshan, 
Aniruddha,   and Pradyumna are   the sagun svarups of Vãsudev 
Bhagvãn, and it is the strength of the upãsanã of Virãt-Purush that he 
becomes capable of performing the activities of creation, sustenance, 
and  destruction.    Moreover,  as  long  as  he  worships  these  three,  his 
association  with Mãyã – in  the  form  of  creation,  sustenance,  and 
destruction – is not broken.  It is when he worships Vãsudev Bhagvãn, 
who is nirgun, that Virãt-Purush abandons Mãyã and becomes brahm-
rup.    Similarly,  when  the jeev worships Bhagvãn in  the svarup of 
Brahma and  other devs,  it  attains  rewards  in  the  form  of dharma, 
arth, and kãm.  However, when it worships the avatãrs of Bhagvãn, it 
becomes brahm-rup and  attains kalyãn.    The  same  applies  for Virãt-
Purush. 
 
31.9
 “Now, it is said in the shãstras that the avatãrs are  formed from that 
Virãt-Purush.  This should be understood as follows:  When Vãsudev-
Nãrãyan – through the svarup of Purush – comes and resides in Virãt-

GADHADÃ II 
- 515 - 
Purush,  He  is  said  to  be  an avatãr.    Therefore,  all  those avatãrs are 
Vãsudev Bhagvãn’s only.  When the Vãsudev Bhagvãn withdraws 
Himself and separates from Virãt-Purush, then it is not possible for an 
avatãr to  be  formed  through Virãt-Purush alone.    Therefore,  the 
descriptions  of avatãrs manifesting  through  him  are  only  because of 
the   presence   of Vãsudev in   him.      In   fact,   when Vãsudev – the 
kshetragna – had not yet entered him, that Virãt-Purush was not even 
capable of performing any of his own activities. 
 
31.10 
“When Purush impregnates Mãyã, a son in the form of Virãt-Purush is 
produced   via Pradhãn-Purush.      From   that   same Mãyã,   many 
brahmãnds – in  the  form  of  many Virãt-Purush – are  produced  via 
countless Pradhãn-Purush pairs.    Furthermore,  that Purush has  no 
desires,  he  is  a mukta,  he  is brahm-rup, and  he  is  the  cause  of Mãyã.  
Although  he  stays  within Mãyã,  he  still  remains  unaffected  by Mãyã.  
Also, he has no desire to enjoy Mãyã since he is happy due to the bliss 
of brahm; therefore, he is fulfilled. 
 
31.11 
“The ishvar known as Virãt-Purush indulges in the pleasures of mãyã 
and  then,  at  the  time  of  destruction,  abandons Mãyã.   On  the  other 
hand, the jeev indulges in the pleasures of mãyã and then merges into 
Mãyã, remaining miserable.” 
 
31.12 
Shuk  Muni  then  asked,  “Purushottam Vãsudev,   in   the svarup of 
Purush,  is  the  cause of  the  creation,  sustenance,  and  destruction  of 
countless brahmãnds.    Consequently,  the shãstras generally  describe 
Purushottam as Purush.    But,  what  is  the  extent  of  the  distinction 
between Purush and Vãsudev?” 
 
31.13 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then explained, “Just as there is a difference between 
the jeev and Virãt-Purush, who is an ishvar; and just as there is also a 
difference between ishvar and Purush, similarly, there is an immense 
difference   between Purush and Vãsudev Bhagvãn.    Purushottam 
Vãsudev Bhagvãn is  the  master  of  all,  whereas  there  are  many  such 

GADHADÃ II 
- 516 - 
brahm-rup Purush who  worship  the  holy  feet  of Vãsudev and  who 
offer to praise to Him.  In this way, Purushottam, Purush, ishvar, jeev, 
and Mãyã are the five eternal entities. 
 
31.14 
“I have explained this fact in this way many times, but it is not firmly 
fixed in a person’s heart due to a lack of deep thinking.  As a result, 
after  listening  to  the  words  of  the shãstras,  no  stability  remains  in  a 
person’s understanding.  However,  if  it  has  been  absolutely  fixed, 
then his understanding would never falter on listening to such words.  
Therefore,  this  fact  should  be  thoroughly  thought  of  and  written 
down.”   
 
31.15
 In this way, the talk delivered by Shreeji Mahãrãj has been written. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 31 || 165 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 32 
Detaching From The Body 
 
32.1 
In the Samvat year 1880, on Shrãvan sud 5 [11
th
 August 1823], Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  in  His  residence  in  Dãdã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.    He  had  tied  a  black-bordered  cloth  around  His  head,  and 
garlands of flowers were hanging around His neck.  Also, bunches of 
flowers  had  been  placed  above  His  ears,  and  tassels  of  flowers  were 
placed upon His head.  A sabhã of paramhans, as well as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
32.2 
Then, addressing all of haribhaktas, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “In worldly 
life, the love a person has for family members is like that of a cactus 
plant  or  the  branch  of  a  banyan  or  pipal  tree – if  they  are  cut  and 
planted   elsewhere,   they   would   once   again   grow   into   trees.      In 
comparison, once a mango tree or a neem tree is cut, it does not take 
root again.  The love that a person has for those other than his family 

GADHADÃ II 
- 517 - 
members is like that of the mango tree or the neem tree; whereas the 
love a person has for his family members is like the cactus plant and 
banyan  tree – if  they  have  been  cut  down,  they  definitely  do  grow 
again, even while lying in the soil. 
 
32.3
 “For this reason, the love that a person has for his family is only 
uprooted when he realises his true svarup to be the jeevãtmã, distinct 
from  the  three  bodies  of sthul, sukshma and kãran;  when,  after 
discarding   all   pride   of   gender, varna and ãshram, he   beholds 
Bhagvãn’s murti within it; and when he becomes eager to engage only 
in  the  worship  of Bhagvãn.    Only  then  will  the  love  for  his  family  be 
completely cut.  Besides this, there is no other means to do so.” 
 
32.4
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj continued, “The  sole  cause  behind  the jeev 
attaining kalyãn,  overcoming mãyã,  and  becoming brahm-svarup is 
its   engagement   in   the gnãn, dhyãn, kirtans,   and kathã of   the 
pratyaksha svarup of Vãsudev Bhagvãn, who is Purushottam.  It is due 
to these that the jeev overcomes mãyã, attains an extremely elevated 
state,  and  also  attains Bhagvãn’s Akshardhãm.    In  this, ãtmã-nishthã, 
vairãgya,   and dharma are   merely   helpful   in   offering bhakti to 
Bhagvãn.  Without the bhakti of Bhagvãn, vairãgya, ãtmã-nishthã, and 
dharma alone are not capable of allowing the jeev to overcome mãyã.  
In  fact,  even  if  a  person  does  not  possess  intense dharma, ãtmã-
nishthã,  or vairãgya,  if  he  possesses  only bhakti towards Bhagvãn, 
then  he  would  still  attain kalyãn.    This  is  the  power  of bhakti over 
dharma, ãtmã-nishthã, and vairãgya. 
 
32.5 
“However, only with the help of dharma, ãtmã-nishthã, and vairãgya, 
is unobstructed bhakti possible.  Without those other characteristics, 
there  will  definitely  be  difficulties  in  offering bhakti during  times  of 
unpleasant  circumstances.    That  is  why  a  person should  offer bhakti 
coupled with dharma, ãtmã-nishthã, and vairãgya. 
 
32.6 
“Having said this, even if a bhakta who offers such bhakti happens to 
be confronted by unpleasant desh, kãl, kriyã,  and sang, then although 

GADHADÃ II 
- 518 - 
he is a bhakta of Bhagvãn, his heart would indeed become disturbed, 
and  he  would  become  unpredictable.  Therefore,  a  person  should 
abandon   unpleasant desh,   unpleasant kãl,   unpleasant kriyã, and 
unpleasant sang and  forever  associate  with  pleasant desh,  pleasant 
kãl,  pleasant kriyã, and  pleasant sang;  but  never  should  a  person 
associate with unpleasant circumstances.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 32 || 165 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 33 
The Vow Of Nishkãm 
 
33.1
 In  the Samvat year 1880,  on Shrãvan vad 13 [18
th
 September  1823], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress  with  a 
large,   cylindrical   pillow   that   had   been   placed   on   a   decorated 
bedstead  in  Dãdã  Khãchar's darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed 
entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
33.2 
Then,  addressing  all  the sãdhus and bhaktas,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said, 
“First, I shall talk about my strengths.  After that, all of you can 
describe  your  personal  thoughts  on  how  you feel kalyãn can  be 
attained, and you can also explain how you think you should behave 
in  order  for Bhagvãn to  be  pleased  with  you  in  this lok and  other 
loks.” 
 
33.3 
Having said this, Shreeji Mahãrãj began to describe His own strength, 
saying, “If it appears to me that I have a liking for something, I would 
only  be  happy  after  I  have  discarded  it.    Should  I  recall  in  my  mind 
any object or any person other than bhaktas of Bhagvãn, then I would 
feel  comfortable  only  after  I  have  totally  distanced  myself  from that 
object or person.  Also, in my heart, in no way do I ever experience a 
dislike  towards  a bhakta of Bhagvãn.    Even  though  I  am  forcefully 

GADHADÃ II 
- 519 - 
offered the panch-vishays without actually wishing for them myself, I 
still do not have any desire for them; I push them away.  In fact, I take 
oath on the lives of these paramhans that from the day I was born to 
this  very  day,  I  have  never  had  an  improper  thought  regarding 
women  or  wealth,  either  in  the jãgrat state  or  in  the svapna state.  
Therefore,  I  am  eternally flawless.    A  person  who  perceives  any 
avgun in  me  will  himself  suffer  from  vicious  thoughts  both  in  the 
jãgrat and svapna state.    Moreover,  he  will  suffer greatly  at  the  time 
of his death as well. 
 
33.4 
“In addition, only the thought of Bhagvãn remains  within  my  heart, 
and   although   I   outwardly   meet   and   associate   with bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn,  it  is  solely  for  the  benefit  of  their jeevs.    Indeed,  the  day 
when  I  feel  that  I  have  developed  love  for  something  other  than  the 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn,  I  will  consider  myself  as  having  been  displaced 
from  my  spiritual  status.    However,  I  am  confident  that  that  would 
never happen.  Therefore, I have described my strength to you.  Now, 
all of you can describe your own personal strengths.” 
 
33.5 
Hearing   this,   all   the sãdhus and bhaktas each   described   their 
strengths,  which  were  their  beliefs  as  to  how Bhagvãn would  be 
pleased  upon  them  if  they  were  to  abide  by  that  strength  in  this lok 
and  other loks.    Of  them, some  described  how  they  possess vairãgya 
of  everything  except Bhagvãn;  others  mentioned  their  quality  of 
ãtmã-nishthã;   some   spoke   of   their   love   for Bhagvãn;   and   some 
mentioned  their  observance  of dharma.    In  this  way,  many  different 
strengths were mentioned.  However, no one mentioned the strength 
that Shreeji Mahãrãj had in mind. 
 
33.6 
So, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “If a person firmly observes the vow of 
nishkãm, then he is never far from Bhagvãn – whether he is in this lok 
or other loks.  Moreover, my love for such a person never diminishes.  
In  fact,  the  very  reason that  I  have  stayed  here  is  because  of  the 
determination  of  the bhaktas to  observe  the  vow  of nishkãm.    If  a 
person  strictly  observes  that  vow,  then  even  if  I  were  a  thousand 

GADHADÃ II 
- 520 - 
miles  away  from  him,  I  would  still  be  close  to  him.    Conversely,  if  a 
person is slack in his observance of the vow of nishkãm, then even if 
he  is  beside  me,  he  is  as  good  as  a  hundred  thousand  miles  away.  
Also, I only like the service offered by a bhakta who is nishkãmi.  It is 
only   because   this   Mulji   Brahm-Chãri   is   extremely   strict   in   his 
observance  of  the  vow  of nishkãm that  I  like  his sevã very  much.  
However, if someone else does sevã, I am not as pleased. 
 
33.7 
“Furthermore, in all the talks that I deliver, I always strongly promote 
the observance of the vow of nishkãm.  I have been firmly reinforcing 
this since the day I was born. 
 
33.8
 “When a sabhã has  gathered,  if  a  man  or  woman  looks  at  someone 
else with kãm, then no matter how hard they may try to conceal it, it 
never   escapes   my   attention.      At   that   time,   I   become   extremely 
displeased upon that person, and even my face turns red.  It hurts me 
deeply, but feeling obliged, I cannot say much.  Furthermore, being a 
sãdhu,  I  keep  my  feelings  within  my  heart.    However,  if  I  were  to 
adopt the ways of a king, I would punish that person severely. 
 
33.9 
“That is why I have already instructed all the senior paramhans and 
senior women that if any male or female bhakta in satsang commits a 
breach in his or her observance of the vow of nishkãm, then please do 
not  inform  me  of  it.    This  is  because  I  am  deeply  saddened  when  I 
hear  such  things – just  as  a  childless  couple  would  feel  saddened  if 
their  newly  born  son  were  to  suddenly  die.    In  fact,  at  such  times,  I 
feel  like  abandoning  this satsang and  leaving.    Therefore,  only  those 
who  observe this  vow  of nishkãm are  dear  to  me;  they  and  I  will 
always be very close, both in his lok and other loks.” 
 
33.10 
Then,  Harji  Thakkar  asked,  “By  what  means  can  a  person’s 
observance of the vow of nishkãm become extremely firm?” 
 
33.11 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “There is a way, and it comprises of three 
components.    Just  as  many  components  make  up  a  bull-cart – the 
driver,   the   pair   of   bulls,   the   wheels,   the   yoke,   the   supporting 

GADHADÃ II 
- 521 - 
assembly,  and  the  wooden  frame – similarly,  many  components  are 
required  to  be  able  to  firmly  observe  the  vow  of nishkãm.    Of  these, 
there are three that are absolutely fundamental. 
 
33.12 
“The first is to conquer the mind by constantly thinking, ‘I am the 
ãtmã, not the body’.    Also,  the  mind  should  be  continuously kept 
engaged in the nine types of bhakti.  It should not be left unoccupied 
for even a moment.  For example, if a man conquers a ghost, but does 
not  assign  it  some  work  to  do,  the  ghost  would  turn  onto  the  man 
himself.    In  this  sense,  the  mind  is  just  like a  ghost;  when  it  is  not 
engaged  in  the bhakti of Bhagvãn,  it  begins  to  think  of  evil  thoughts.  
This can  be  compared  to the  ghost  getting  ready  to  devour  the  man.  
For  this  reason,  the  mind  should  continuously  be  kept  occupied  in 
kathãs and kirtans related to Bhagvãn.  This can be known as having 
conquered the mind. 
 
33.13
 “The second component is to keep the prãns under  control.   Shree 
Krishna Bhagvãn has  said  in  the  Bhagvad  Geetã, ‘A person’s diet and 
activity should be kept regulated; he should not keep a strong yearning 
for food’.    A  person  who  behaves  in  this  way  is  said  to  have  kept  his 
prãns under  control.    If  this  is  not  done,  he  will  feel  an  intense 
yearning  for  food  in  his  mind.    Consequently,  his  tongue  will  crave 
after the countless types of tastes.  As a result, any other indriyas that 
he  may  have  conquered  will  also  become  free.    Therefore,  a  person 
should control his prãns by controlling his diet. 
 
33.14 
“The  third component requires a  person to  control  his  body  by 
physically keeping it within the niyams prescribed in satsang for each 
individual.  
 
33.15 
“So, by strictly observing these three components in this way, a 
person’s observance of the vow of nishkãm becomes  extremely  firm.  
However,  a  person  should  not  consider  this  to  be  very  difficult  to 
practice; it is not at all difficult for someone who is, after all, a sãdhu.  
The enemies, such as kãm, krodh, and lobh prevail strongly even in a 

GADHADÃ II 
- 522 - 
sãdhu, but to please Bhagvãn, he would still abandon them; only then 
can he be called a true sãdhu. 
 
33.16 
“After all, what is impossible to achieve with this human body?  That 
which is practiced regularly can definitely be achieved.  For example, 
due to the daily drawing of water from a well, the constant rubbing of 
even a soft rope can cause a groove in the very hard piece of rock that 
lies  on  the  edge  of  that  well.    Similarly,  for  a  person  who  is  a sãdhu 
and   who   continuously  persists   in   his   efforts   for   eradicating   his 
svabhãvs, how long can those svabhãvs remain?  They most certainly 
will  be  destroyed.    Therefore,  a  person  who  wishes  to  observe  the 
vow  of nishkãm should intensely  employ  the method  that  comprises 
of the three components I have just described.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 33 || 166 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 34 
Are The Tattvas Jad Or Chaitanya? 
 
34.1 
In  the Samvat year  1880,  on Bhãdarvã sud 1  [5
th
 September  1823], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   the   veranda 
outside  the  east-facing  rooms  of  Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.  
He was wearing a white dhoti and had covered Himself with a white 
chãdar.  He had also tied a black-bordered cloth around His head.  A 
sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had 
gathered before Him.  Some of the paramhans were singing kirtans to 
the accompaniment of a dukad and sarodã.
 
 
34.2 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Please stop the kirtans, and let us conduct 
a question-answer discussion in order to dispel drowsiness.” 
 
34.3 
Having said that, Shreeji Mahãrãj continued, “First of all, allow me to 
ask  a  question:    The  twenty-four tattvas,  such  as  the indriyas  and 
antah-karans which  are  the  result  of Mãyã,  reside  in  the jeev.    Now, 
are those elements jad, or are they chaitanya?” 

GADHADÃ II 
- 523 - 
 
34.4 
The paramhans replied, “Those tattvas are definitely chaitanya.” 
 
34.5 
Hearing the reply, Shreeji Mahãrãj contradicted, “If those elements 
are chaitanya,  then  along  with  the jeev residing  in  this  body,  there 
should  be  twenty-four jeevs for  the  twenty-four tattvas.    Therefore, 
when  the jeev attains kalyãn,  it  would  be  distributed  among  all  of 
them.    Moreover,  all  sins  that  are  committed  by  the jeev would  also 
be distributed among all of them.  Therefore, that which experiences 
pleasure  and  pain  cannot  be  said  to  be  just  one jeev.    Furthermore, 
the  three  types  of karmas – sanchit karmas, prãrabdha karmas,  and 
kriyamãn karmas – cannot   be   said   to   apply   to   just   one jeev.  
Furthermore, in the past, when Nãrad and the others attained kalyãn, 
only  their  own jeev attained kalyãn,  but  there  is  no  mention  of  the 
jeevs of the twenty-four tattvas attaining kalyãn as well.” 
 
34.6 
By using such logic, Shreeji Mahãrãj proved the tattvas to be without 
a jeev.      He   then   logically   disproved   each   answer   given   by   the 
paramhans.  As  a  result,  the paramhans were  unable  to  answer  the 
question in any way at all. 
 
34.7 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Allow me to answer the question.  Due to 
the indifference between an effect and its cause, there are two types 
of tattvas.  The tattvas that are in the form of cause are chaitanya, and 
the tattvas that are in the form of the effect are jad.  In actuality, the 
jeev resides  in  the  heart;  but  through  its  power  of  consciousness,  it 
behaves  with  oneness  with  the  body,  the indriyas,  and  the antah-
karans.   As  a  result,  the  body,  the indriyas,  and  the  antah-karans 
appear to be chaitanya; but, in reality, they are jad. 
 
34.8 
“When that jeev becomes  a bhakta of Bhagvãn and  attains  the  dhãm 
of Bhagvãn,  the tattvas that  are jad are  left  behind.    Now,  as  those 
twenty-four tattvas are produced from Mãyã, they are forms of Mãyã 
and  are jad;  they  appear  differently  in  the  form  of  the  body,  the 
indriyas, and the antah-karans.  For example, there is one pruthvi that 
assumes   the   five   forms   of   the   skin,   flesh,   marrow,   bones,   and 

GADHADÃ II 
- 524 - 
muscles.    Due  to  the  skill  of  the  maker,  it  also  comes  in  the  form  of 
glass.    In  the  same  way,  that Mãyã,  due  to  the  will  of Bhagvãn, 
appears  in  different  forms  (the  body,  the indriyas,  and  the antah-
karans).” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 34 || 167 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 35 
Upãsanã Is Required To Attain Kalyãn 
 
35.1 
In  the Samvat year  1880,  two-and-a-half  hours  before  sunrise  on 
Bhãdarvã sud 11 [16
th
 September 1823], Shreeji Mahãrãj awoke from 
sleep and sat on a decorated bedstead that had been placed over the 
underground store of grains in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.  
He  was  wearing  a  white khes and  had  covered  Himself  with  a white 
pachhedi.  He had also tied a black-bordered cloth around His head. 
 
35.2
 At  that  time,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  summoned  all  the paramhans and 
bhaktas.  Then, addressing them, He began, “I slept very soundly last 
night, and though I tried very hard to awake, I could not.  During that 
sleep,  I  thought  a  great  deal.    I  have  made  a  decision  based  upon 
these thoughts, which I shall now tell you.” 
 
35.3
 He then said, “Even before I met Rãmãnand Swãmi, I could see my 
ãtmã as if it were before my eyes, and I also see it now.  That ãtmã is 
luminous with light like that of the sun.  Even amidst the activities of 
all  my indriyas,  I  do  not  lose  awareness  of  that ãtmã for  even  a 
moment. 
 
35.4 
“In actual fact, such ãtmã-nishthã is  very  difficult  to  attain.    Only  a 
fortunate person who has sanskãrs of many past lives is able to attain 
such ãtmã-nishthã,  whereas  if  someone  else  were  to  think  about  the 
ãtmã for  even  a  hundred  years,  he  would  still  not  attain ãtmã-
nishthã. 
 

GADHADÃ II 
- 525 - 
35.5 
“So, how can a person attain ãtmã-nishthã?    Well,  when  a  person 
performs dhyãn upon the murti of Shree Krishna Bhagvãn, it is not at 
all difficult to attain kalyãn.  Conversely, no one should even hope of 
understanding   or   seeing   the ãtmã by   merely   thinking   about   it 
without  performing dhyãn upon Bhagvãn.    However,  by  the upãsanã 
of Bhagvãn,  narrating  His charitras,  chanting  His  holy  name,  and 
following dharma, it is not at all difficult for the jeev to attain kalyãn; 
it  is  an  easy  path – like  crossing  the  ocean  by  sitting  in  a  boat.    In 
contrast,  to  attain kalyãn through ãtmã-nishthã is  a  difficult  path – 
like tying gourds to the body and trying to cross the ocean. 
 
35.6 
“The only reason why I deliver such talks about knowledge of the 
ãtmã is  that  if  a  person  can  realise  his ãtmã to  be  distinct  from the 
body,  then  he  will  no  longer  have  any  love  for  his  body  or  for  his 
relatives.  Then, there would no longer be any obstacles in the bhakti 
of Bhagvãn.    This  is  the  only  reason;  but  a  person  should  not  think 
that  it  is  possible  to  attain kalyãn by  the  knowledge  of  the ãtmã 
alone. 
 
35.7 
“Also, there are sayings in the world such as, ‘If the mind is pure, then 
a  vessel  of  water  is  as  good  as  Gangã-water’.  So,  if  the  mind  is  pure, 
there  is  no  need  to  bathe  in  the  Gangã  to  become  pure.    However, 
these  words are  not  true.    Regardless  of  how  much  a  person  may 
have mastered samãdhi, or how thoughtful he may be, if he begins to 
stay  in  the  close  company  of  women,  there  is  no  way  in  which  he 
could  maintain  his dharma.    Similarly,  regardless  of  how  strict  a 
woman may   be   in   observing dharma,   if   she   stays   in   the   close 
company  of  men,  then  she  would  also in  no  way  be  able  to maintain 
her dharma.    Therefore,  no  one  should  believe  that  men  and  women 
can stay in each other’s company and still be able to maintain their 
dharma.  This fact is true, and no one should doubt it. 
 
35.8 
“When can a person maintain his dharma?    Only  if  those  who  are 
paramhans and brahm-chãris abide  by  the niyams prescribed  for 

GADHADÃ II 
- 526 - 
them,  such  as brahm-chãrya, will  they  be  able  to  maintain  their 
dharma.    The  same  is  true  for  women;  only  if  they  abide  by  the 
niyams prescribed  for   them   will   they   be   able  to   maintain   their 
dharma as  well.    In  the  same  way,  if  all  other satsangi  grahasthas 
abide by the niyams prescribed for them – including not staying in an 
isolated  place  with  even  his  young  mother,  sister,  or  daughter;  and 
not extensively looking at them either – then they will also be able to 
maintain their dharma. 
 
35.9 
“In this way, following dharma, upãsanã of the svarup of Bhagvãn, 
listening to and narrating the charitras of Bhagvãn’s avatãrs, and 
chanting His holy name, are the four qualities that are fundamentally 
necessary for the jeev’s kalyãn. 
 
35.10 
“Indeed, all of you realise me to be Bhagvãn.    So,  wherever  I  have 
organised  festivals;  wherever  all  the paramhans and brahm-chãris, 
male  and  female satsangi bhaktas have  gathered;  when  I  have  had 
kirtans sung;  when  I  have  delivered  talks;  and  when  my pujã had 
been  performed,  all  such leelãs and charitras should  be  narrated, 
heard,  and  thought  about  in the  mind.    If  a  person remembers  these 
during  his  last  moments,  his jeev will  certainly  attain  the dhãm of 
Bhagvãn.    In  this  way,  all  of  my leelãs and charitras,  as  well  as  the 
chanting  of  my  name,  are kalyãn-kãri.    When  I  explained  this  to 
Svarupãnand Swãmi, the agonising pain in his body due to illness was 
completely relieved, and he felt profound peace.  In fact, he could see 
his own ãtmã very well, yet it was of no use. 
 
35.11 
“A  person should  also  narrate  the  listen  to  the charitras of  the 
previous avatãrs of Bhagvãn,  such  as Rãm and Krishna,  wherever 
those charitras may have taken place. 
 
35.12 
“It is for the purpose of consolidating those four qualities in you that I 
described   the   importance   of   the   eight shãstras,   like   Shreemad 
Bhãgvat.    Therefore,  the shãstras should  be  read  and  studied;  and 
only those four qualities should be emphasised. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 527 - 
35.13 
“Also, understand that to try to attain kalyãn by  only  observing 
dharma without  the  other  three  qualities – upãsanã of Bhagvãn’s 
murti,  narrating  and  listening  to Bhagvãn’s charitras,  and  chanting 
His  holy  name – would  be  as  difficult  as  trying  to  cross  the  ocean 
after tying gourds to the body.  Yet, though a person has refuge of the 
murti of Bhagvãn;  though  he  narrates  and listens Bhagvãn’s leelãs 
and charitras; and though he chants the name of Bhagvãn, if he does 
not observe dharma, he should be known to be as foolish as a person 
who  tries  to  cross  the ocean  carrying  a  stone slab  upon  his  head;  he 
should also be known to be like an outcast. 
 
35.14 
“Therefore, a jeev can  attain kalyãn only  by  those  four  qualities.  
Without them, there are no other means by which a person can attain 
kalyãn.  However, a person should only listen to and sing the kirtans 
and  poems  written  by  Muktãnand  Swãmi  and  other sãdhus.   Kirtans 
and  poems  composed  by  other  poets  can  also  be  heard  and  sung  if 
they  describe  the leelãs and charitras of Bhagvãn.    However,  poems 
and kirtans like  those  composed  by  the  likes  of  Kabir  and  Ãkhã 
should not be sung or heard.” 
 
35.15 
Concluding, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “All of you have faith in me.  If I 
were  to  mislead  you  with  unfounded  talks,  it  would  amount  to 
throwing all of you into a well and sealing it with a stone slab so that 
there would be no hope of escape.  However, if you are misled along 
the  wrong  path  because  of  your  faith  in  my  words,  then  what  good 
would that be to me?  Therefore, these talks are for the sake of your 
kalyãn.  I have told you this out of love for all of you, so now all of you 
should understand it and strictly live by it.” 
 
35.16 
Having said this, Shreeji Mahãrãj finally added, “Now, if you have 
decided to act according to the talk which I have just delivered, then 
come forward one by one and touch my feet.  While doing so, take an 
oath and pledge, ‘I definitely want to behave accordingly’.” 
 
35.17 
Then,  all  the paramhans and satsangis happily  got  up  and  touched 
Shreeji Mahãrãj’s holy feet and bowed before Him.  He then told the 

GADHADÃ II 
- 528 - 
ladies  to  do  the  same.    So,  standing  at  a  distance,  the  ladies  also 
pledged and took an oath to behave accordingly.  Shreeji Mahãrãj was 
very pleased with this.  Then, He retired to His residence. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 35 || 168 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 36 
Maintaining Continuous Vrutti 
 
36.1 
In  the Samvat year  1880,  on Bhãdarvã sud  Punam [30
th
 September 
1823], Swãmi Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  west-facing  rooms  of  Dãdã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various 
places, had gathered before Him. 
 
36.2 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Please conduct a question-answer 
discussion.” 
 
36.3 
Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked a question:  “By what means can a 
person continuously engage his vrutti on Bhagvãn?” 
 
36.4 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Actually, there are four methods to achieve 
this.    Of  these,  the  first  method  is  that  the chitt has  a  tendency  of 
becoming  engrossed;  so  it  can  become  engrossed  in  everything.    So, 
just  as  it  becomes engrossed in a person’s son or wife, it can also 
become engrossed in Bhagvãn.  Therefore, that is one method. 
 
36.5 
“The second method is to be extremely brave.  When a person with 
such  bravery  in  his  heart  conceives  some  desirous  thought  other 
than that of Bhagvãn, as he is a brave bhakta, intense thinking arises 
within    which    dispel    all    desirous    thoughts.        Therefore,    he 
continuously engages his vrutti on the svarup of Bhagvãn. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 529 - 
36.6 
“The third method is fear.  If extreme fear of birth, death, Narak, and 
the  cycle  of  births  and  deaths  exists  in  a  person’s  heart,  he 
continuously engages his vrutti on the svarup of Bhagvãn due to fear. 
 
36.7 
“The fourth method is vairãgya.   A  person  with vairãgya – through 
gnãn of  the  Sãnkhya shãstras – realises  his  own ãtmã to  be  distinct 
from  the  body;  and  except  for  that ãtmã,  he  realises  all  worldly 
objects  to  be asatya.    Following  this,  he  beholds Paramãtmã within 
his ãtmã and continuously thinks about Him.
 
 
36.8 
“With the exception of a person on whom Bhagvãn bestows His grace 
– regarding   which   nothing   can   be   said – people   may   attempt 
countless  other means,  but  without  resorting  to  these four  methods, 
a   person   will   not   be   able   to   continuously   engage   his vrutti on 
Bhagvãn.    Of  course,  continuously  engaging  the vrutti on Bhagvãn is 
an  extremely  difficult  achievement.    It  is  only  possible  by  those 
whose  good  deeds  from  many  lives  have  ripened.    For  others,  it  is 
very difficult, indeed.” 
 
36.9 
Having described how to continuously engage the vrutti on Bhagvãn’s 
svarup, Shreeji Mahãrãj added, “In this world, everyone talks of mãyã.  
I  have  seen  the  characteristics  of  that mãyã as  follows:    Love  for 
anything other than Bhagvãn is itself mãyã.  In fact, the love a person 
has  towards  his  own  body  and  his  relatives  and  towards  the  person 
who  provides  for  his  body,  exceeds  even  the  extreme  love  a  person 
has  for  the panch-vishays.    Therefore,  a  person  who  has  eradicated 
love for his body, his relations, and those who provide for his body is 
said  to  have  risen  above Bhagvãn’s mãyã.    In  fact,  a  person  who 
eradicates   love   for   everyone   other   than Bhagvãn develops   love 
towards Bhagvãn.    Then,  when  love  for Bhagvãn is  developed,  his 
vrutti continuously  remains  on Bhagvãn.    When  that  is  achieved,  he 
has nothing further to achieve; he has become fulfilled.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 36 || 169 || 

GADHADÃ II 
- 530 - 
Gadhadã II – 37 
Eradicating A Svabhãv 
 
37.1 
In  the Samvat year  1880,  on Bhãdarvã vad 1  [21
st
 September  1823], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   the   veranda 
outside the west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  
He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    At  that  time,  a sabhã of 
paramhans, as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered 
before Him. 
 
37.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “In the Geetã, it is said that even a 
person  possessing gnãn behaves  according  to  his svabhãvs,  and  not 
even the strength of self-control mentioned in the shãstras is effective 
in such cases.  Then, how can such svabhãvs be eradicated?” 
 
37.3 
All  the munis thought  over  the  question,  but  they  were  unable  to 
answer it. 
 
37.4 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “The answer to that is as follows:  When a 
sat-purush gives  guidance  on  how  to  eradicate  such svabhãvs,  if  a 
person has total faith in those words; if he has deep love for the sat-
purush giving  the  guidance;  and  if  he  accepts  those  words  to  be  for 
his  own  benefit  no  matter  how  painfully  strong  these  sat-purush’s 
words  seem,  then  his svabhãvs will  be  eradicated.    Except  for  this, 
there   is   no   other   method.      Therefore,   regardless   of   how   much 
Bhagvãn or the sat-purush insults him for the purpose of eradicating 
his svabhãvs,  and  regardless  of  the  harsh  words  they  may  utter,  a 
person  who  wishes  to  eradicate  his svabhãvs should  not  feel  hurt  in 
any way and should consider only the qualities of the person advising 
him.    If  a  person  behaves  in  this  way,  then  that svabhãv,  which 
otherwise could not be eradicated in any way, is eradicated.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 37 || 170 || 
 

GADHADÃ II 
- 531 - 
Gadhadã II – 38 
Mãnchã Bhakta And The Alchemist 
 
38.1 
In  the Samvat year  1880,  on Bhãdarvã vad 6  [26
th
 September  1823], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress  with  a 
large,   cylindrical   pillow   that   had   been   placed   on   a   decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  east-facing  rooms  of  Dãdã 
Khãchar's darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.    At  that  time,  a sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
38.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “If a worldly person were to come across 
someone who could grant him wealth or a son, he would immediately 
develop  faith  in  that  person.    However,  a bhakta of Bhagvãn never 
has  faith  in  charms  and  spells,  in  witchcraft  or  in  vulgar,  dramatic 
performances.      If   he   were   to   have   faith   in   charms,   spells,   or 
witchcraft,  then  even  though  he  may  be  a satsangi,  he  should  be 
considered to be half vimukh. 
 
38.3
 “Having  said  this,  there  are  not  many  true bhaktas of Bhagvãn.  
Nonetheless, Mãnchã Bhakta of Kãriyãni was indeed a true bhakta of 
Bhagvãn.    Prior  to  joining  the satsang,  he  was  in  the  Mãrgi  sect.  
However,  in  no  way  did  he  lapse  in  his  observance  of  the  vow  of 
nishkãm; instead, he remained a brahm-chãrya from his childhood. 
 
38.4 
“Once, an alchemist was staying at his house.  After demonstrating 
how he could transform copper into sliver, the alchemist told Mãnchã 
Bhakta, ‘Because you are very charitable, I shall teach you  this  spell 
and show you how to transform copper into sliver’.  However, Mãnchã 
Bhakta threatened him with a stick and drove him out of the village, 
telling    him, ‘I  have  no  desire  for  anything  except  Bhagvãn’.  
Afterwards,   when   Mãnchã   Bhakta   joined satsang,   he   became   an 
ekãntik bhakta of Bhagvãn.” 
 
38.5 
Continuing, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “An ekãntik  bhakta would  firstly 
possess ãtmã-nishthã;  secondly,  he  would  possess vairãgya; thirdly, 

GADHADÃ II 
- 532 - 
he  would  be  strict  in  following dharma;  and  fourthly,  he  would 
possess  profound bhakti for Shree Krishna Bhagvãn.    When  such  an 
ekãntik  bhakta abandons his physical body, he ‘merges’ into Shree 
Krishna Bhagvãn,  whereas  a  person  who  is  not ekãntik ‘merges’ into 
Brahmã and   the   other devs or   into Sankarshan, Aniruddha,   or 
Pradyumna.    However,  without  attaining  the ekãntik state,  a  person 
cannot ‘merge’ into Shree Krishna Bhagvãn. 
 
38.6 
“Such ‘merging’ should be understood as follows:  A person who is 
very greedy is said to ‘merge’ into money; a person  who  is  very 
lustful is said to ‘merge’ into the woman he is fond of; and when a 
person  who  is  very  rich  but  childless  receives  a  son,  he  is  said  to 
‘merge’ into his son.  In this way, a person should be known as having 
‘merged’ into whatever he is attached to.  However, this ‘merging’ is 
not  like  that  of  water  merging  with  water  or  like  fire  merging  with 
fire. 
 
38.7 
“If a bhakta has ‘merged’ into his ishta-dev,  he  would  never  develop 
love   for   anything   else   except   his ishta-dev.      In   fact,   he   would 
continuously think of Him.  If he were forced to live without his ishta-
dev, he would live life in days of deep misery; but, in no way would he 
be happy.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 38 || 171 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 39 
Behaving According To Natural Qualities 
 
39.1 
In the Samvat year 1880, on Bhãdarvã vad 10 [29
th
 September 1823], 
Shreeji Mahãrãj arrived  at  Lakshmi-Vãdi  on  horseback  from  Dada 
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  There, He sat on a decorated bedstead 
that  had  been  placed  on  the  platform.    He was  dressed  entirely  in 
white  clothes.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 533 - 
39.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Please reveal to me the qualities which 
are  natural  to  you – qualities which  do  not  decrease  even  under  the 
influence of unpleasant desh, kãl, kriyã, and sang.” 
 
39.3 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then began Himself, “Here, let me first tell you the 
qualities that are natural to me.”  He then said, “Firstly, it is my 
nature  that  regardless  of  how  much  physical  contact  of  the panch-
vishays I  encounter,  I  do  not  have  any  desire  for  them  in  my  mind – 
not even in my dreams. 
 
39.4 
“Secondly, regardless of how much pravrutti I  may  be  physically 
involved  in,  when  I  look  within  towards  my ãtmã,  all  my vruttis 
withdraw into  my ãtmã – just  like  a  tortoise  withdraws  its  limbs – 
and I experience profound bliss. 
 
39.5 
“Thirdly, I have a very strong belief that Bhagvãn possesses a svarup.  
I  believe  that Shree  Krishna  Vãsudev resides  in  His Akshardhãm – 
which  is  full  of chaitanya and  full  of  divine  light – and  possesses  an 
eternal  and  definite svarup.   Bhagvãn is  also  the  all-doer,  since  that 
which  is nirãkãr can  accomplish  nothing.    In  fact,  my  belief  that 
Bhagvãn possesses  a svarup is  so  firm  that  even  though  I  have  read 
and heard many Vedãnt shãstras, my belief has not been changed. 
 
39.6 
“Fourthly,  if  I  come  to  know  of  any  man  or  woman  that  is 
pretentiously offering bhakti to Bhagvãn merely as an outward show, 
and that person is not a genuine bhakta of Bhagvãn, then my mind is 
not pleased upon seeing such a person.  Also, I never feel comfortable 
with that person, because my mind only becomes pleased when I see 
a  genuine bhakta of Bhagvãn,  and  I  am  only  comfortable  with  such 
people. 
 
39.7 
“I have described to you these four qualities that are natural to me.  
Now, all of you may tell me yours.” 
 
39.8 
Then, the senior paramhans and bhaktas described the qualities they 
possessed.   

GADHADÃ II 
- 534 - 
39.9 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “For those who are senior amongst you, 
the observance of the vow of nishkãm is an absolute must.  It may be 
fine if a person has a deficiency in some other aspect, but firmness in 
nishkãm is  absolutely  essential,  as  the  example  set  by  the  seniors  is 
what is followed by everyone else.” 
 
39.10 
After delivering this talk, Shreeji Mahãrãj returned to Dãdã Khãchar’s 
darbãr,  performed  the ãrti,  and  joined  in  the ‘Nãrãyan’ dhun and 
prayers.  Then, a sabhã of all the sãdhus and bhaktas was held there. 
 
39.11
 At  that  time,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  the  senior paramhans, “I have 
greatly explained the importance of the fifth and tenth skandhs of the 
Shreemad  Bhãgvat.    Now,  I  would  like  all  of  you  to  explain  the 
fundamental  principle  of  those  two skandhs as  you  have  come  to 
understand it.” 
 
39.12 
All the senior paramhans offered explanations according to their own 
understanding. 
 
39.13 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “Here,  allow  me  to  tell  you  the 
fundamental principle of those two skandhs.  But first of all, what can 
be   called   a   fundamental   principle?      Well,   when   a   fu