

 
    
 
 
 
VACHANÃMRUT 

 
 
 
In Memory Of 
Akshar-Nivãsi Mahant Purãni Swãmi Shree Hari-Svarup-Dãsji 
 
Inspired By 
H.H. Ãchãrya 1008 Shree Koshalendra-Prasãdji Mahãrãj 
 
 
Published By 
Shree Swãminãrãyan Mandir Bhuj 
 
 
Samvat 2066 Vaishãk Sud 5 
May 18
th
 2010 
 
 Shree Nar-Nãrãyan Dev 
Nutan Mandir Mahotsav 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Shree Swaminarayan Mandir
 
Shree Swaminarayan Road
 
Bhuj-Kutch
 
Tel: +91 2832
 
250231
 
www.bhujmandir.org
 

 
i 
Vachanãmrut 
 
Throughout  His  lifetime  on  Earth,  Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn  (Shreeji 
Mahãrãj)  educated  the  masses  through  His  spiritual  and  philosophical 
discussions.      The   subject   matter   included svadharma   ãtmã-gnãn, 
vairãgya, gnãn of Bhagvãn’s svarup, and bhakti coupled with Bhagvãn’s 
greatness.    The  great sants,  Muktãnand  Swãmi,  Gopãlãnand  Swãmi, 
Nityãnand    Swãmi,    Brahmãnand    Swãmi,    and    Shukãnand    Swãmi 
catalogued  thousands  of  these  discussions  word  for  word,  so  that 
future haribhaktas could have the fortune of Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn’s 
divine words.  This compilation of discussions came to be known as the 
‘Vachanãmrut’ - ‘vachan’ (speech)  and ‘amrut’ (nectar).    This shãstra 
contains  the  sweet  words  of  Swãminãrãyan  Bhagvãn  which  are  the 
nectar  our jeev desires;  like  nectar  they  provide  us  with  a  way  to 
eternal happiness in His Akshardhãm. 
 
The Vachanãmrut is a shãstra of ‘upãsanã’, whereas the Shikshãpatri is 
a shãstra of ‘ãgnã’.    The  Vachanãmrut  is  compiled  of  273 sabhãs 
ranging  from  Vikram Samvat  years  1876  to  1886.    The  talks  of  these 
sabhãs were  carefully  chosen  by  Swãminãrãyan  Bhagvãn  Himself  for 
inclusion in the Vachanãmrut.  It is divided into eleven sections, based 
on the various villages in which the talks were delivered.  Within each 
section,  individual  Vachanãmruts  are  arranged  in  chronological  order, 
and  are  numbered.  However,  one  Vachanãmrut  is  not  related  to  the 
next, allowing them to be read in any order. 
 
Prior to the 273 Vachanãmruts there is a section known as Parthãro.  It 
provides a meticulous description of Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn’s daily 
activities, His association with bhaktas, and details about His body and 
mannerisms. This description allows bhaktas to visualise 
Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn, and strengthen their devotion. 
 
The Vachanãmrut is full of wonderful unique features which enable the 
reader  and  listener  to  move  closer  to  Swãminãrãyan  Bhagvãn.    In 
particular,  a  person  is  drawn  to  the  intricate  details  contained  in  the 
first paragraph of each Vachanãmrut.  The paragraph contains an exact 
description  of  the  time  and  surroundings  in  which  the sabhã took 
place.  It also depicts the exact position of Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn and 

 
ii 
His  appearance.    Not  only  does  this  authenticate  the shãstra as  being 
true, but it also allows haribhaktas to imagine themselves sitting in His 
sabhãs.    The  Vachanãmrut  is  such  a  profound shãstra, that  in  order  to 
understand   its   contents   it   is   vital   that   the   reader   and   listener 
concentrate  their  mind  on  Swãminãrãyan  Bhagvãn  Himself,  and  not 
only on the environment in which the discussion took place. 
 
The  issues  raised  in  the  Vachanãmrut  are  quite  varied,  ranging  from 
deeply  philosophical  and  theological  subjects,  such  as  the  nature  of 
Bhagvãn,  creation  of  the  universe,  clarifications  of  the  classical  Hindu 
philosophies of ãchãryas, to more spiritually practical subjects such as 
the kalyãn of  the jeev,  good  and  bad  company,  and  the  means  of 
attaining  eternal  happiness.    Regardless  of  the  subject,  Swãminãrãyan 
Bhagvãn   had   the   gift   of   clearly   and   elegantly   explaining   complex 
concepts   through   simple   examples.     In   fact,   even   the   uneducated 
villagers sitting in the sabhã were able to grasp profound philosophical 
concepts due to His use of simple language and meaningful examples. 
 
Instead  of  opting  for  a  monologue  style  of  speaking,  Swãminãrãyan 
Bhagvãn delivered His talks in the form of a discussion, like the method 
used by the rushis in the Upanishads.  At times, Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn 
would  pose  a  question  to  the  members  of  the sabhã,  or  sometimes  He 
would  ask  the sabhã to  pose  a  question  to  Him.    On  some  occasions, 
members of the sabhã would ask a question directly.  In His sabhãs, all 
were  free  to  question  and  even  to  counter-question,  regardless  of 
whether they were educated tyãgis or simple grahasthas.  Even though 
the sabhã was   graced   by   many   learned   scholars,   Swãminãrãyan 
Bhagvãn  was  able  to  provide  gratifying  answers  to  the  questions 
posed.    Not  only  does  this  confirm  His  status  as  the  Purushottam 
Nãrãyan, but it also illustrates that whatever guidance we receive from 
the Vachanãmrut, it is from Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn Himself.   
 
The   authenticity   of   the   Vachanãmrut   is   further   demonstrated   by 
Swãminãrãyan  Bhagvãn  in  Vachanãmrut  Gadhadã II – 28, in  which  He 
says, “I have delivered  this  talk  to  you  after  hearing  and  extracting  the 
essence  from  the  Veds,  the  six-shãstras,  the  Purãns,  and  all  other  words 
on   this   earth   relating   to   moksh.      This   is   the   most   profound   and 
fundamental  principle,  and  it  is  the  essence  of  all  essences”.  This 

 
iii 
illustrates that the talks delivered by Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn were not 
created in His mind, but as a result of His practical experiences, which 
He reveals in Gadhadã III – 39: “I deliver these talks to you not from any 
imagination   of   my   mind,   nor   to   display   any   sort   of   skill.      I   have 
experienced  all  that  I  have  spoken  about.    In  fact,  I  speak  in  accordance 
to what I practice”. 
 
Simply striving  to understand  the  words of  the  Vachanãmrut  does  not 
lead to the true knowledge of its contents.  This knowledge is revealed 
only  by  the  grace  of  Swãminãrãyan  Bhagvãn.    This  grace  is  attained 
after  constant  reading  of  the  Vachanãmrut.    Just  as  it  is  difficult  to 
obtain amrut,   it   is   difficult   to   obtain   the   true   knowledge   of   the 
Vachanãmrut.    It  is  not  a shãstra to  be casually  read  like  a  book  of 
fiction; it is a book to be lived with, and read over and over again.  Each 
time  a  person  thinks  over  the  contents  of  the  Vachanãmrut,  new 
knowledge  is  revealed.    Some  people  think  it  is  a  difficult shãstra to 
read  and  do  not  make  any  effort  towards  studying  it.    Ordinary  books 
on  philosophy  and  spirituality  topics  are  difficult  to  read  and  only 
appeal  to  educated  scholars.    However,  Swãminãrãyan  Bhagvãn  has 
put the best of the spiritual knowledge in the simplest of forms. 
 
Therefore, ‘Vachanãmrut’ is the perfect name for this shãstra,  as  it  is 
amrut in  the  form  of  the  words  of  Swãminãrãyan  Bhagvãn.    Just  as 
amrut has   the   distinct   property   of   granting   freedom   from   death 
(immortality), the words of Bhagvãn similarly grant freedom from the 
cycle of births and deaths to all those who strive for their wisdom, and 
immortality and eternal bliss in Akshardhãm. 
 
 
The English Vachanãmrut 
 
The  Vachanãmrut  has  been  translated  into  English  for  the  benefit  of 
satsangis who  find  reading  and  understanding  Gujarati  difficult.    The 
reader  can  rest  assure  that  this  translation  has  been  made  directly 
from an authenticated version of the Vachanãmrut published by Shree 
Swãminãrãyan  Mandir,  Bhuj.    However,  as  no  translation  can do  true 
justice  to  the  original  text,  we  advise  that  the  Gujarati  Vachanãmrut 
should   be   read   with   this   English   Vachanãmrut   being   used   as   a 
reference where needed. 

 
iv 
To  translate  this shãstra was  truly  a  profound  task.    It  was  vital  to 
ensure  that  the amrut  vãni (divine  words)  of  Swãminãrãyan  Bhagvãn 
were  not  lost  in  translation.    Each  sentence  has  been  translated  in  the 
same order as the Gujarãti version to ensure that the true meanings of 
the  talks  are  maintained  accurately.    However,  certain  concepts  in  the 
Vachanãmrut  simply  have  no  equivalent  English  words  or  phrases,  so 
the  original  Gujarãti  or  Sanskrit  words  have  been  kept.    The  reader  is 
advised to make full use of the glossary to understand the meanings of 
these words.  
 
The glossary is a unique tool in assisting the reader to understand the 
essence  of  the  Vachanãmrut.    It  not  only  contains  an  explanation  of 
words that cannot be translated, but also words that can be translated 
but  the  English  equivalent  does  not  provide a  true meaning.    Also,  the 
Sanskrit shloks have  been  transcribed  and  translated,  and  hyphens 
have  been  added  in  these shloks to aid  in  the  reading  of  long  Sanskrit 
words.    Also,  some  complete shloks have  been  included  at  times in 
order to aid its translation. 
 
Finally,  to  aid memory and understanding,  paragraph  breaks  have 
been added, even though the original manuscripts of the Vachanãmrut 
did  not  have  paragraph  breaks  at  all.    These  paragraph  breaks  allow 
the reader to easily grasp and memorise concepts.   
 
With  the murti of  Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn  in  our  hearts,  we  have 
attempted  to  do  justice  to  this  powerful  scripture.    We  apologise  in 
advance  for  any  mistakes  we  may  have  made  along  the  way,  as  no 
version will ever be as good as the Gujarati Vachanãmrut, as only that 
version  contains  the divine  words  spoken  directly  by  Swãminãrãyan 
Bhagvãn  Himself.    We  pray  that  He  is  pleased  with  our  attempt  to 
spread His amrut vãni in this modern era. 
 
 
Mahant Purãni Swãmi Shree Dharmanandan-Dãsji Swãmi

PARTHÃRO 
- 1 - 
 
|| SHREE SWÃMINÃRAYAN VIJAYTETRÃM || 
 
VACHANÃMRUT 
Parthãro 
 
Bhagvãn and His Akshardhãm  
 
In the midst of Golok is Bhagvãn’s Akshardhãm.  It is full of light which 
is  brighter  than  millions  of  suns,  moons,  and  fire;  it  is divya and  is 
extremely white.  It    is sachidãnand,    and    is    called Brahmpur, 
Amrutdhãm, Parampad, Anant-Apãr, Brahm, and Chidãkãsh.    Such  is 
Akshardhãm in which Shree Krishna Bhagvãn eternally resides. 
 
Bhagvãn is  known  as Purushottam, Vãsudev, Nãrãyan, Paramãtmã, 
Brahm, Parbrahm, Ishvar, Parameshvar, and Vishnu.  Bhagvãn is beyond 
the  mortal  and  immortal  beings,  omniscient,  all-doer,  the  lord  of  all, 
antaryãmi,   and   the   cause   of   all   causes.      He   is nirgun,   luminous, 
independent, and is worthy of worship by innumerable muktas. 
 
The leelãs of Bhagvãn include the creation, sustenance, and destruction 
of  countless brahmãnds.      He   gives   power   to Prakruti-Purush, Kãl, 
Pradhãn-Purush, and mahã-tattva.  He is the lord of all brahmãnds, and 
is  in  the  eternal svarup of  an  adolescent,  which  is  more  beautiful  than 
millions of Kãm-Devs. 
 
His  complexion  is  dark  blue,  like  that  of  a  fresh  cloud.    He  is  wearing 
exquisite clothes and jewellery, such as crocodile-shaped earrings and 
a beautiful crown encrusted with precious jewels.  
 
His  eyes  are  as  beautiful  as  the  petals  of  a  lotus  that  flourish  in  the 
season  of  Sharad.   Fragrant  sandalwood  paste has been  applied  to  His 
body.    He  is  playing  a  delightful  melody  on  His  bamboo  flute,  and 
Rãdhikãji and Lakshmiji are performing His sevã. 
 
He   is   holding   a chakra,   a padma,   a gadã,   and   a shankh,   and   is 
worshipped   by   countless pãrshads,   including   Nand,   Sunand,   and 
Shreedãmã.  His murti is brighter than the light of millions of suns and 

PARTHÃRO 
- 2 - 
moons.    He  possesses  great  powers,  and  immeasurable kalyãn-kãri 
gun, such as dharma, gnãn, and vairãgya.  Also, the siddhis worship His 
lotus feet, and the four Veds praise His greatness and glory. 
 
The Vishvarup form,  the  twenty-four  four-armed svarups,  and avatãrs 
such  as Varãh,  originate  from  Him.    The  great Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn 
has  taken birth  on  earth,  in  Kaushal-Desh,  with  all  His  powers,  to 
spread ekãntik dharma; to protect and to give happiness to His ekãntik 
bhaktas,  such  as  Dharma,  Bhakti,  and  the rushis;  to  grant kalyãn to 
innumerable jeevs; and to eradicate adharma. 
 
 
The Incarnation Of Shree Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn 
 
Once, Marichi and the other rushis went to Badrikãshram for darshan of 
Shree Nar-Nãrãyan.  After hearing of this, Dharma-Dev and Murti-Devi 
also   went   for darshan of Shree   Nar-Nãrãyan.      After   they   had   all 
performed darshan of Shree  Nar-Nãrãyan,  they  took  their  seats  in  the 
sabhã, which consisted of many rushis and Uddhavji. 
  
The rushis were  describing  to Shree  Nar-Nãrãyan the  conditions  of 
Bharat-Khand (Earth).  Then, while Nãrãyan was speaking to the sabhã, 
everyone was listening to Him with full concentration.   
 
At that time, Durvãsã Rushi arrived from Kailãs to perform darshan of 
Shree  Nar-Nãrãyan.  However,  his  arrival  was  not  acknowledged,  and 
he was not welcomed.  Therefore, he cursed the entire sabhã and said, 
“Those who  have  dishonoured  me  will  be  born  on  Bharat-Khand  as 
humans and will suffer the torture that the demons thrust upon you”.  
Upon  hearing  this,  Dharma-Dev  tried  to  calm Durvãsã  Rushi.   Durvãsã 
Rushi then said, “I cursed you because I did not know that you were in a 
conversation  with  Shree  Nar-Nãrãyan,  and  because  of  this  you,  did  not 
see  me  and  welcome  me.    The  curse  cannot  be  retracted,  but  I  will  give 
you some relief.  Dharma-Dev and Murti-Devi will be born into brãhman 
families and Shree Nãrãyan will be born to you as a son.  He will free you 
and  these  rushis  from  my  curse,  and  will  protect  you  all  from  the 
demons”.  Saying this, Durvãsã Rushi returned to Kailãs. 
 
Then, Shree  Nãrãyan said  to  everyone, “If it was my wish, I could have 
retracted  this  curse that  you  have  received  without any  fault.    However, 

PARTHÃRO 
- 3 - 
at  this  time,  the  effects  of  Kali-Yug  are  prevalent  on  Bharat-Khand,  and 
therefore  the  demons  are  in  full  force.    In  order  to  destroy  them,  I  have 
accepted this curse.  Therefore, as the son of Dharma-Dev, I shall destroy 
the  demons  and  protect  you  all,  and  will  establish  ekãntik-dharma 
throughout Bharat-Khand.  You should not worry, and should take birth 
as humans on Bharat-Khand”.  
 
Hearing  these  words,  everyone  bowed  to Shree  Nãrãyan and  left  the 
sabhã to make preparations for their birth on earth. 
 
 
Dharma-Dev and Bhakti-Devi 
 
In Kaushal-Desh there was a village known as Itãr.  In the village lived a 
Sarvariyã  Sãm-Vedi brãhman named  Bãl-Sharmã  Pãnde  and  his  wife 
Bhãgyavati.    Dharma-Dev  was  born  to  them in Samvat year  1796,  on 
the  afternoon  of Kãrtik sudi 11.    His  father  named  him  as  Dev-Sharma 
on the twelfth day of his birth with full religious rites. 
 
In  Chhapaiyã,  there  lived  a  Travãdi brãhman named  Krishna-Sharmã 
and his wife Bhavãni. Murti-Devi was born to them in the Samvat year 
1798,  on  the  evening  of Kãrtik sudi 15 Punam.    As  she  got  older,  her 
bhakti for Shree Krishna increased,  and  she  was  therefore  known  as 
Bhakti. 
 
Krishna-Sharma  arranged  for  his  daughter  Bhakti  to  be  married  to 
Dev-Sharma,  son  of  Bal-Sharma.    Krishna-Sharma  kept  his  son-in-law 
at  his  house  in  Chhapaiyã.    Dev-Sharma  and  Bhakti-Devi  followed  the 
dharma of the grahastha  ãshram whilst offering loving bhakti to Shree 
Krishna.  As Dev-Sharma was so strict in his dharma, he became known 
as Dharma-Dev. 
 
Dharma-Dev  and  Bhakti-Devi  were  harassed  immensely  by  demons.  
To  ease  this  suffering,  they  went  to  Vrundãvan  and  prayed  to Shree 
Krishna with  the rushis.    This  pleased Bhagvãn,  so  He  gave  them 
darshan of  Himself  in  the  same svarup that He  resides in Akshardhãm.  
He  said, “Dharma-Dev  and  Bhakti-Devi.    The  demons  that  torture  you 
now  are  the  demons  I  had  killed  in  my  Krishna  avatar.    They  desire 
revenge  upon  me.    They  know  that  you  are  my  own,  which  is  why  they 
trouble  you.    To  destroy  these  demons,  I  will  be  born  to  you  as  Nãrãyan 

PARTHÃRO 
- 4 - 
Rushi, with the name Hari-Krishna. I will protect you from them and free 
you from Durvãsã Rushi’s curse.  I will destroy the demons and adharma, 
and establish ekãntik dharma on earth”.    The murti of Shree Krishna 
Bhagvãn then  disappeared,  and  entered  the  heart  of  Dharma-Dev.  
Dharma-Dev   and   Bhakti-Devi   returned   to   Chhapaiya   with   great 
happiness,  and  offered bhakti to Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn.    As Bhagvãn 
was  extremely  pleased  with  Dharma-Dev,  he  also  became  known  as 
Hari-Prasãd. 
  
After  many  months, Shree Krishna  Bhagvãn was  born  to  Hari-Prasãd 
and  Bhakti-Devi  in  the Samvat year 1837,  on  the  evening  of Chaitra 
sudi 9 at  10.10pm.    He  was  surrounded  by  a  bright  light.    A  grand 
celebration  took  place  at  the  house  of  Hari-Prasãd.    The devs came 
shouting “Jay!  Jay!”, playing   drums,   and   showering flowers.      The 
apsãrãs came dancing, whilst the gandharvas sang songs, and the rushis 
offered  blessings.    The  minds  of devs and sãdhus were  extremely 
pleased, whilst the demons were in despair.  The women of the village 
were  singing  auspicious  songs,  and  were  blessing Bhagvãn in  the 
svarup of  a  newborn  baby.    A  mild,  fragrant,  cool, and  a  gentle  breeze 
was  present  in  the  air.  The  stars  sparkled  amidst  the  clear  night  sky.  
Also, due to the birth of Bhagvãn, Chhapaiyã became like Akshardhãm.  
Then,  Hari-Prasãd  had  the  birth  ceremony  performed  for  his  son  by 
many brãhmans, and he gave them various types of alms in return. 
 
On the sixth day of the birth of the Bhagvãn, Kotrã (an evil witch) and 
other  demons  came  to  kill Bhagvãn in  His  infant svarup.    However, 
when Bhagvãn looked at them, they were burnt and were driven away. 
 
When Bhagvãn attained  the  tender  age  of  three  months  and  eleven 
days, Mãrkandey Rushi went to the house of Hari-Prasãd.  Hari-Prasãd 
welcomed him warmly and recognised him to be a great astrologer.  He 
then said, “Please perform the naming ceremony of our son”.   
 
Mãrkandey  Rushi  happily  said, “Hari-Prasãd.    This  son  of  yours  will 
relieve you and His followers from all difficulties and troubles.  As He was 
born  in  Kark  Rãshi,  He  shall  be  called Hari.    Also,  He  your  son  shall  be 
known  as Krishna,  as  He  has  got  a slightly  dark  complexion,  He  will 
always attract the minds of His followers, and He was born in the month 
of  Chaitra.   Though  Hari  and  Krishna  are  two  separate  names,  He  will 
also  have  a  third name Hari-Krishna,  which  is  the  union  of Hari  and 
Krishna. 

PARTHÃRO 
- 5 - 
“As your son will have the five gun of tyãg, gnãn, tap, dharma, and yog.  
He   will   be   like   Shivji,   and   will   therefore   be   known   as Nilkanth 
throughout  the  world.    Your  son  has  the  mark  of  a padma on  His  palm, 
and vajra, urdhva-rekhã and kamal on His feet, which shows that He will 
be  the  lord  of  millions  of  people.    He  will  also  possess  countless  kalyãn-
kãri gun, and will protect you from all misery and suffering”. 
 
Hari-Prasãd then offered money, costly new garments, and jewellery to 
Mãrkandey Rushi.    He  stayed  there  for  one  day,  and  then  left  for 
pilgrimage to Prayãg.  Hari-Prasãd and Bhakti-Mãtã were very pleased 
to know the gun of their son. 
 
Shree  Hari pleased His  parents  and  relatives  through  His leelãs, and 
grew like a crescent moon.  Then, when He was five months old, Hari-
Prasãd started to teach Him to sit.  Then, when He was six months old, 
Hari-Prasãd started  to  teach  Him  to  eat.    Then,  when  He  was  seven 
months old, He had His ears pierced. 
 
At   the   start   of   His   third   year,   the chaul   sanskãr ceremony   was 
performed.  On that same day, a demon named Kãlidatt appeared to kill 
Bhagvãn.    However, Bhagvãn confused Kãlidatt  by  appearing  in  all 
directions.  Whenever Kãlidatt tried to grab Bhagvãn, he collided with a 
tree.    This  ultimately caused  His  death.    Hari-Prasãd  then  took  his 
family  from  Chhapaiyã  to  Ayodhyã  due  to  the  suffering  caused  by  the 
demons. 
 
When  Shree  Hari  reached  the  age  of  five,  Hari-Prasãd  taught  Him  to 
write His first word.  Then, at the age of eight, He gathered pujã items 
and alms from the brãhmans, and performed the yagnopavit ceremony.  
Thereafter,  Shree  Hari,  after  receiving  the yagnopavit from  His  father, 
observed  the dharma of  a naishtik brahm-chãri,  and  studied  the  Veds.  
By reading the shãstras and listening to the kathãs given by His father, 
He  learnt  the  hidden  meanings  of  the  Veds, the  Purãns, historical 
shãstras,  and  Dharma-Shãstras, and  was  able  to  understand  each  of 
these shãstras.    He  took  the  essence  from  of  each shãstra.    From  the 
Shreemad  Bhãgvat,  He  extracted  the  essence  from  the  fifth  and  tenth 
skandh; from the Skand Purãn, He extracted the essence of the Vãsudev 
Mahãtmya;  from  the  Mahãbhãrat,  He  extracted the  Vidur-Niti,  Vishnu-
Sahasranãm, and the Bhagvad Geetã; and from all the Dharma-Shãstras 

PARTHÃRO 
- 6 - 
He  extracted  the Yãgnavalkya  Smruti.    Shree  Hari  then  compiled  a 
gutko of the essence of all these shãstras. 
 
At  the  age  of  eleven,  Shree  Hari  gave  His  mother,  Bhakti-Mãtã,  the 
knowledge  of bhakti coupled  with dharma, gnãn,  and vairãgya.    As  a 
result  of  this,  Bhakti-Mãtã attained Akshardhãm,  and  was  therefore 
freed from Durvãsã Rushi’s curse.  After many months, He gave the 
same  knowledge  to  His  father,  Hari-Prasãd,  and  also  freed  him  from 
the  curse  of  Durvãsã  Rushi.    In  this  way,  Hari-Prasãd  and  Bhakti-Devi 
attained Akshardhãm, and remain in the constant sevã of Shree Hari. 
 
 
Shree Hari On Van Vichran 
 
Shree  Hari  left  the  house  with  an  excuse  of  going  to  bathe.    However, 
due  to  His  intense vairãgya, He abandoned  His  family  and  home,  and 
travelled north to perform tap. 
 
Shree Hari wore a small dhoti with a loin-cloth underneath (tied with a 
grass rope), a white yagnopavit, and a kanthi of tulsi beads around His 
neck,  His  long  hair  was  tied  in  a  bun,  and  He  had  the  mark  of  the 
urdhva-pundra tilak and chãndlo on His forehead.  He carried with Him 
deer-skin,  a  wooden  T-shaped  stick,  a kamandalu,  an  alms-bowl,  a 
piece of cotton to filter water, and a mãlã in His right hand.  Around His 
neck,  He  tied  a  small  case  containing shãligrãm,  and  a murti of Bãl-
Mukund,  and  over  His  shoulder  He  carried  the gutko which  contained 
the essence of the shãstras.  In this svarup, Shree Nilkanth Brahm-Chãri 
swam across the River Saryu, and headed north. 
 
After  walking  for  many  days,  He  came  to  a  large  forest  located  in  the 
valley  of  the  Himãlay  Mountains.    After  walking  through  the forest  for 
many  days,  He  eventually  reached  Mukti-Nãth,  in  Nepal.    Here,  He 
performed  severe tap in order to  please Surya-Dev.  Then,  after  many 
months  had  passed,  He  headed  south.    In  the  deep  valleys  of  the 
Himãlay  Mountains,  Shree  Nilkanth  Brahm-Chãri  came  across  another 
extremely dense forest, which He travelled through for twelve months. 
 
Shree  Nilkanth  Brahm-Chãri  then  came  across  Gopãl  Yogi,  who  was 
sitting  under  a  banyan  tree,  and  was  performing tap.    He  stayed  with 
Gopãl   Yogi   for   twelve   months   and   learnt   the   art   of ashtãng-yog.  

PARTHÃRO 
- 7 - 
Nilkanth  Brahm-Chãri  gave  Gopãl  Yogi  the  knowledge  of  His svarup 
and sent him to Akshardhãm. 
 
Then, He headed north, passed through Ãdi -Varãh, and reached Sirpur, 
in Bengãl.  The king of Sirpur, Siddh-Vallabh, was very religious.  At the 
request  of  the  king,  Shree  Nilkanth  Brahm-Chãri  stayed  in  Sirpur 
during the four months of the monsoon season.  During this period, He 
destroyed  the  pride  of  evil  people  who  worshipped Kãli  and  Bhairav, 
and protected Gopãldãs, a servant of the king, from their black-magic. 
 
In  the  town,  there  lived  a brãhman from  the  Telang  region  (part  of 
Andhra-Pradesh and Tamil Nadu).  He had originally studied Veds, the 
Purãns, and historical shãstras.  He had accepted many alms, including 
an elephant from the king, which he did not deserve.  As a result of this, 
his complexion turned from fair to dark.  This brãhman took the shelter 
of  Shree  Nilkanth  Brahm-Chãri  for  the  destruction  of  his  sins.    Shree 
Nilkanth  Brahm-Chãri  relieved  him  from  his  sins  and  he  attained  his 
original fair complexion. 
 
Shree Nilkanth Brahm-Chãri later reached a village near the mandir of 
Kãmakshi Devi, where there lived a brãhman.  He was a worshipper of 
Mahã-Kali,  and  was  terrifying  the brãhmans and sãdhus who  came  to 
visit  the  village.    He  was  using  his  black-magic  to  make  them  his 
followers.  He approached Shree Nilkanth Brahm-Chãri and tried to use 
his  black-magic  and  sorcery  on  Him,  but  was  unsuccessful.    Instead, 
Shree Nilkanth  Brahm-Chãri rid  the brãhman of  his  arrogance  and 
made him a shishya. 
 
Later,   Shree   Nilkanth   Brahm-Chãri   came   to   Nav-Lakhã   Mountain, 
where  there  were  the  seats  of  900,000 yogis.    In  front  of  these yogis, 
there  were  900,000  flames  within  a  pool  of  water.    Shree  Nilkanth 
Brahm-Chãri  gave  His darshan to  all  the yogis,  and  descended  the 
mountain.  
 
Shree  Nilkanth  Brahm-Chãri  then  came  down  to  a  place  called  Bãlvã-
Kund.  From there, He reached the union between the River Gangã and 
the Bay of Bengãl, called Gangã Sãgar.  After bathing there, He crossed 
the  bay  with  a  small  boat,  and  then  went  to  Kapil  Ãshram.    He  stayed 
there for a month, where He daily received the darshan of Kapil-Dev. 

PARTHÃRO 
- 8 - 
Progressing onwards, He reached Jagan-Nãth-Puri.  After staying there 
for  a  few  months,  He  destroyed  many  demons.    With  His  powers,  He 
made  them  fight  amongst  themselves  in  such  a  way  that  they  killed 
each other.  Then, Shree Nilkanth Brahm-Chãri headed south, reaching 
a  place  called  Ãdi-Kurma.  He  then  crossed  a  dense  forest,  before 
arriving  at  Mãnaspur.    The  king  of  Mãnaspur,  Satra-Dharma,  became 
His ãshrit.    Through  the  king,  Shree  Nilkanth  Brahm-Chãri  destroyed 
many demons. 
 
Shree  Nilkanth  Brahm-Chãri  passed  Venkantãdri,  Shiv  Kanchi,  and 
Vishnu Kanchi, and later stayed at Shree-Rang-Kshetra for two months.  
Through   His   power   and   ability,   He   debated   with   Vaishnavs,   and 
persuaded them to abandon their immoral behaviour. 
 
Shree Nilkanth Brahm-Chãri then went to Setu-Bandh and stayed there 
for two months.  Every day, He took a bath in the ocean and performed 
darshan of  Rãmeshvar  Mahã-Dev.    He  also  received  the darshan of 
Vishnu in the svarup of Sunder-Rãj.  
 
Moving forward, He came across a dense forest, where He kept walking 
for  five  days  without food  and  water.    On  the  sixth  day,  at  around 
midday,  He  saw  a  water-well.    He  bathed  with  the  water  that  He  had 
taken  out  of  the  well  using  His kamandalu.    He  sat  beneath  a  banyan 
tree  and  carried  out  His  daily pujã,  including  that  of shãligrãm.    He 
placed shãligrãm in  a  bowl  and  started  to  bathe  it  by  pouring  water 
from  the kamandalu.    The  water  did  not  gather  in  the  bowl,  but  was 
absorbed by shãligrãm.  Having emptied roughly seven kamandalus full 
of   water,   which   was   all   absorbed   by shãligrãm,   He   realised that 
shãligrãm had now quenched its thirst.  He started to perform pujã by 
applying  sandalwood  paste.    At  that  time  He  thought, “Shãligrãm was 
very thirsty, and must also be hungry, yet I have nothing to offer to Him.  
What can I give Vishnu?” 
 
At that time, Shivji and Pãrvati arrived there, travelling on Nandishvar, 
in the disguise of tyãgis.  They saw Shree Nilkanth Brahm-Chãri in His 
pujã and  offered  Him sãthvo and  salt.    He  mixed  the sãthvo and  salt 
with water, and offered it to Vishnu in the svarup of shãligrãm, and then 
ate it Himself as prasãd.  
 

PARTHÃRO 
- 9 - 
From  there,  He  travelled  to  a  place  known  as  Bhut-Puri,  where  He 
stayed  for  the darshan and pujã of  Shree  Rãmãnuj-Ãchãrya.    Then,  He 
went to Kumãrikã, Padmanãbh, Janãrdan, and then had the darshan of 
Vishnu in the svarup of Adi Keshav.  Next, He went to Kulgiri, known as 
Malayãchãl, and stayed there for five days, receiving darshan of Vishnu 
in  the svarup of  Sãkshi  Gopãl.    Shree  Nilkanth  Brahm-Chãri  later  went 
to  Pandharpur  and  stayed  there  for  two  months,  and  received  the 
darshan Vishnu as Vitthal-Nãth. 
 
Shree  Nilkanth  Brahm-Chãri  then  performed pradakshinã of  a  place 
called Dand-Kãranya.  He continued His journey and reached Nãsikpur, 
where He received darshan of Trambakeshvar.  Shree Nilkanth Brahm-
Chãri  then  crossed  River  Tãpi,  River  Narmadã,  River  Mahi,  and  River 
Sãbarmati. 
 
Shree  Nilkanth  Brahm-Chãri  then  travelled  through  Bhal  region  and 
reached Bhim-Nãth.  Shree Nilkanth Brahm-Chãri received the darshan 
of Shiv in the svarup of Gop-Nãth, and reached the port of Mãngrol.  In 
this   way,   while   on yãtrã,   He   destroyed adharma and   established 
ekãntik dharma every tirth He visited.  He freed the people living there 
from   the   ties   of   worldly   affairs   by   giving   them   His darshan and 
accepting food and water offered by them. 
 
 
Shree Nilkanth Brahm-Chãri In Loj 
 
Shree  Nilkanth  Brahm-Chãri  reached  Lojpur in  the Samvat year  1856, 
on Shrãvan vad 6.  He  met Rãmãnand Swãmi’s shishya, Muktãnand 
Swãmi, and many  other sãdhus.    He  acknowledged  them as  the  loyal 
bhaktas of Shree Krishna Bhagvãn and recognised the characteristics of 
true sãdhus.   So,  He  stayed  with  them.  After  staying  there  for  several 
months, He travelled in company of the sãdhus to Piplãnã, located near 
Mount Girnãr. 
 
Shree  Nilkanth Brahm-Chãri  arrived  in  Piplãnã  in  the Samvat year 
1856,  on Jyeshth  vad 12.   There, He met Rãmãnand  Swãmi, who  was 
staying at  the  house  of  Narsinh  Mehtã.    Rãmãnand  Swãmi  was  of  a 
large  build,  had  a  fair  complexion,  and  was  wearing  white  clothes, 
which  is  suitable  for  a brahm-chãri.    Shree  Nilkanth  Brahm-Chãri 

PARTHÃRO 
- 10 - 
performed dandvat-pranãm before  him,  greeted  him, and  then  sat 
beside him. 
 
Shree  Rãmãnand  Swãmi  was  pleased  to  see  Shree  Nilkanth  Brahm-
Chãri.    Shree  Rãmãnand  Swãmi  asked  Shree  Nilkanth  Brahm-Chãri 
regarding  His  birthplace, family, parents, Ved, guru,  and ishta-dev.  
Shree  Nilkanth  Brahm-Chãri  explained  His  ideas  on vairãgya, tyãg  of 
His   family, staying   in   the   forest,   various   types   of   tap   performed, 
attainment of ashtãng-yog, His yãtrã, and defeat of false gurus. 
 
After hearing  all  these  ideas,  Shree  Rãmãnand  Swãmi  was  extremely 
pleased and said, “Brahm-Chãri.  You are my own.  Your father Dharma-
Dev had taken bhãgvati dikshã from me at Prayãg-Shetra.  He had stayed 
in Kaushal-Desh under my ãgnã, and preached about dharma and bhakti 
of Shree Krishna to those that had the desire to learn.  You are the son of 
the Dharma-Dev, and have more gun than your father”.  Shree Nilkanth 
Brahm-Chãri was pleased to have heard this, and therefore stayed with 
Shree Rãmãnand Swãmi. 
 
In  the Samvat year  1857, Kãrtik sud 11, Shree  Nilkanth  Brahm-Chãri 
was  given bhãgvati dikshã by  Rãmãnand  Swãmi,  and  was  given  the 
names Sahajãnand Swãmi and Nãrãyan Muni.  He remained with Shree 
Rãmãnand  Swãmi  and  served  him  with  great  love  and  admiration.  
Rãmãnand  Swãmi  realised  that  Nãrãyan  Muni  was  gifted  with  all  the 
guns of a true sant and was extremely powerful.  Therefore, he handed 
over the control of the Sampradãy to Him.  Rãmãnand Swãmi then left 
his  physical  body  in the Samvat year  1858,  on Mãgshar sud 13.    He 
returned  to Badrikãshram and  became  free  from  the  curse  of  Durvãsã 
Rushi. 
 
Shree  Sahajãnand  Swãmi  performed  the  funeral  rites  of  His guru and 
began to take care of the Sampradãy.  He was watchful of all the sãdhus, 
brahm-chãris,  and grahasthas.    He  achieved  this  by  giving  talks  based 
on shãstras, which attracted their minds towards Him. 
 
 
Sahajãnand Swami 
 
Shree  Sahajãnand  Swãmi  travelled  through  many  regions,  such  as 
Sorath,   Hãlãr,   Kutch,   Zãlãvãd,   Kathiyãvãd,   Dandhãvya,   Bhãl   and 

PARTHÃRO 
- 11 - 
Gujarãt, accompanied by His sãdhus, brahm-chãris, and grahasthas.  He 
revealed His divinity to the people of these regions, and gave inspiring 
talks   on dharma, gnãn, vairãgya,   and bhakti.      He   also   destroyed 
adharma, and purified the evil minds of the false gurus.  In this way, the 
people  of  all  these  regions  became  His bhaktas,  and  began  to  worship 
Him. 
 
Shree  Sahajãnand  Swãmi  sent  His bhaktas into samãdhi in  order  to 
show  them  His  powers  and  increase  their gnãn.    Some bhaktas saw 
Shree Krishna Bhagvãn giving darshan to Lakshmi, Rãdhikã, Shreedãmã, 
and other pãrshads, in Golok.  Some bhaktas saw Vishnu giving darshan 
to Lakshmi,  Nand,  Sunand,  and  other pãrshads in Vaikunth.    Some 
bhaktas saw Mahã-Purush giving darshan to  the niranna-muktas in 
Shvet-Dvip.      Some bhaktas saw Bhumã-Purush giving darshan to 
Lakshmi and  many pãrshads in Avyãkrut.    Some bhaktas saw Nar-
Nãrãyan giving darshan to  the rushis in Badrikãshram.    Some bhaktas 
saw Shesh-Shãyi-Nãrãyan giving darshan to the bhaktas in Kshir-Sãgar.  
Some bhaktas saw  Hiranyamay-Purush  giving darshan to Surya-Dev 
and  his  servants.    Some bhaktas saw  Yagna-Purush  giving darshan to 
Agni-Dev and  his  servants.    Some bhaktas heard  the  sound  of pranav.  
Some bhaktas saw  light  equal  to  millions  of  suns.    Some bhaktas saw 
Brahm,  which  is sachidãnand,  and  beyond jãgrat, svapna, sushupti.  
Some bhaktas saw Virãt-Purush, who is the supporter of the brahmãnd.  
Some bhaktas saw the loks and powers of the devs.  Some bhaktas saw 
the six chakras and their presiding devs, such as Ganesh. 
 
Sahajãnand   Swami   also   gave darshan to   His bhaktas who   were 
hundreds of miles away, and accepted the food that they had offered in 
their homes, which showed His greatness.  He gave darshan to bhaktas 
who were going to Akshardhãm, and all the people in their village, even 
if  they  were  not bhaktas.    He  also  revealed  His alokik powers  to  both 
bhaktas and kusangis everywhere.    As  the  people were  amazed  by  His 
divine  grace,  they  abandoned  their  own gurus and sampradãys and 
joined satsang. 
 
People  from  many sampradãys came  to  meet  Sahajãnand  Swami  with 
the  intention  of  defeating  Him  in  a  philosophical  debate.    However, 
after realising His greatness, they became humble before Him, and said, 
“Mahãrãj.  You are the avatãr of Bhagvãn.  Kindly give us your darshan, 
so that we can see the devs who we worship”. 

PARTHÃRO 
- 12 - 
On hearing this, Sahajãnand Swami sat them down and sent them into 
samãdhi.  This caused their nãdis and prãns to stop, and their jeevs left 
their bodies, leaving the bodies lifeless.  They all then saw their ishtha-
devs in Sahajãnand Swami.  The Vaishnavs and the followers of Mãdhvi 
and  Nimbãrk  saw  Sahajãnand  Swãmi  in  the svarup of Shree  Krishna 
surrounded  by gopis in  Vrundãvan.    The  followers  of  Rãmãnuj  saw 
Lakshmi-Nãrãyan,  surrounded  by pãrshads,  such  as  Nand,  Sunand, 
Vishvaksen, and Garud.  The bhaktas of Shree Rãm saw Him seated on a 
sinhãsan,   surrounded   by Sitãji, Lakshmanji,   and Hanumãnji.      The 
followers  of  Shankar-Ãchãrya  saw  light,  and  the  followers  of Shiv saw 
Shiv with Pãrvati  and  Ganesh.    The  followers  of Surya-Dev saw Surya-
Dev and Hiranmay-Purush.  The followers of Ganesh saw Mahã-Ganpati.  
The  followers  of devis saw  a devi.    The  Jains  saw  Tirthankar,  and  the 
Muslims saw  Paigambar.   In  this  way,  they  all saw their  own ishta-dev 
in  Sahajãnand  Swami  due  to samãdhi,  and  realised  that  He  was  the 
cause  of  all  the avatãrs.    So, they  all  abandoned  their sampradãys and 
became followers of Sahajãnand Swami. 
 
Sahajãnand   Swãmi   removed   the   darkness   of   ignorance   by   his 
extraordinary  powers,  and  established  the ekãntik  dharma which  had 
been  completely  destroyed  on  the  earth.    He  set  up  alms-houses  with 
the  wealth  of  His  rich grahastha bhaktas,  and  distributed  free  food.  
Also, He performed many yagnas, such as Vishnu-Yãg, Mahã-Rudra and 
Ati-Rudra,  without  the  sacrifice  of  animals.    During  these yagnas,  He 
served   rich   foods,   and   gave   alms to   thousand   of brãhmans.      He 
performed  many pujãs of sãdhu, brãhmans,  and devs,  and  served  rich 
foods.   
 
Sahajãnand  Swãmi  destroyed adharma and  hypocrisy.    He  had  many 
mandirs built in different regions, and installed the various murtis, such 
as Nar-Nãrãyan, Lakshmi-Nãrãyan,  Bhakti-Dharma, Hari-Krishna,  and 
Rãdhã-Krishna.  He displayed miracles through these murtis. 
 
Wherever  He  went,  He  taught  people  about  the dharma of  their varna 
and ashram, gnãn of  the ãtmã and Bhagvãn’s svarup, vairãgya,  and 
bhakti coupled with Bhagvãn’s greatness.  Sahajãnand Swãmi gave bliss 
and joys to His bhaktas at all times. 
 
Sahajãnand Swãmi mainly stayed in Gadhadã as He was attached to the 
bhakti of Abhay Rãjã and his son and daughters, who had all dedicated 

PARTHÃRO 
- 13 - 
their   lives   to Sahajãnand   Swãmi.      He   celebrated   Janamãshtmi, 
Rãmnavmi, Prabodhini Ekãdashi, Holi, and Annkut festivals by serving 
rich  foods.    The paramhans, brahm-chãris,  and bhaktas of  different 
places  came  to  these  festivals  and  offered  gifts  to  Sahajãnand  Swami, 
such  as  rich  clothes,  jewellery,  flowers,  and  sandalwood.    Sahajãnand 
Swami served them rich food and pleased the brãhmans and sãdhus. 
 
 
The Tils and Chihns Of Sahajãnand Swami 
 
On  the  soles  of  the  feet  of  Sahajãnand  Swãmi,  there  are urdhva-rekhã 
(lines).    These  lines  start  between  the  first  two  toes.    They  are  also 
found on the heels.  
 
On  the  sole  of  the  right  foot  there  is  the chihn of  a jav on  the  big  toe.  
There  are  also  the chihn of  a kamal, ankush, dhvaj, ashtakon, vajra, 
svastik,  and  a jãmbu.    On  the  nail  of  the  big  toe,  there  is  a  vertical  red 
line, and on the outer side of the big toe there is a til.  There is a til on 
the side of the second toe facing the big toe.  There is also a til, close to 
the nail, on the outside of the last toe. 
 
On  the  sole  of  the  left  foot,  on  the  left  side  of  the urdhva-rekhã,  there 
are two black chihn.  Near the urdhva-rekhã, at the base of the toe joint, 
there  is  the chihn of vyom.    There  are  also  the chihn of  a dhanush, 
kalash, matsya, trikon, gaupad, and ardha-chandra. 
 
The  soles  of  both  feet  are  pink.    The  nails  are  also  pink,  and  they  are 
luminous.  There are fine hairs on the large toes of both feet.  Between 
the  large  toe  and  the  second  toe,  there  are  marks  and  scratches  from 
wearing chãkhadis.    On  the  outer  ankles  of both  legs,  there  are  marks 
from sitting on the floor.  On the right leg, five inches above the ankle, 
there  is  a  small til,  and  on  the  outer  side  of  the  thigh  there  is  a  large 
mark.    There  is  a  large til on  the  left  leg,  five  inches  above  the  ankle, 
and  above  that  there  is  a  small til.    There  is  also  a chihn on  the  outer 
side of the knee. 
 
On both sides of the waist, there are chihns caused by wearing a dhoti.  
His belly, which is ever cool, folds in three lines.  There are two tils on 
the  sides  of  the  deep,  round  navel.    The til on  the  right  is  close  to  the 
edge of the navel, and the til on the left is slightly further away.  There 

PARTHÃRO 
- 14 - 
is a large til on right side of the waist, and a small til near the large til.  
Two  inches  above  the  navel  there  are  three tils – two  of  them  are  on 
the sides, and one is in the middle – and there is a til two inches above 
the middle til.  On the left side, above the waist there is vertical row of 
four big tils and on the outer side there is another vertical row of four 
small tils.  There is also a vertical row of three tils under the armpit. 
 
On His chest there is a chihn of Shrivatsa formed by hair.  In the middle 
of chest there is a large and reddish chihn, in the shape of a moon.  On 
the right side of His chest there is a slight bulge, and on its centre, but 
little  on  left  side,  there  is  a  large til.    On  the  left  side  of  that til,  at  a 
distance of an inch, there is one til, and farther left, there is a til on the 
chest  at  a  distance  of  two  inches.    Over  the  two  breasts  there  are  two 
branded chihns. 
 
On the internal part of the upper right arm, there are four tils forming a 
vertical  row.    Three  inches  from  the  wrist  there  is  a  branded chihn.  
Beside that chihn, on the outer side, there are four small tils.  Below the 
right elbow and above the wrist there are two tils.  There is a small til, 
at a distance of quarter of an inch and above the root of the last finger.  
 
There  is  a  branded chihn three  inches  from  the  wrist  of  the  left  arm.  
There  is  a til on  the  outer  side  of  the  arm, two  inches  below  the  left 
elbow.    There  is  a til between  the  index  finger  and  the  middle  finger.  
There  is  a  small til on  the  internal  side  of  the  nail  of  the  index  finger.  
There is a til on the wrist of the left hand.  
 
The nails of both the hands are pink, bulging, and luminous.  The front 
parts of the nails are very sharp.  The palms of both the hands are pink. 
The  lines  on  the  palms  are  slightly  dark.    About  eight  inches  up  from 
the  wrist,  there  are  two  branded chihns on  both  forearms.    Both  the 
elbows are dark. 
 
There  is  a til in  the  cavity  of  neck,  and  near  that til,  there  is  another 
small til.  There is a small til right below the chin.  And there is a big til 
with  hair  on  the  back,  at  the  distance  of  two  inches  below  the  left 
shoulder.    There  are  two tils below  that  big  one  and  with  descending 
little  distance  between  them.    There  is  one til on  right  side  of  spinal 
cord, two inches below the neck, and four such tils in the centre of back 
towards right hand side of the spinal cord.  Near the right side of nose 

PARTHÃRO 
- 15 - 
there  is  one  big til and  little  one  above  it  but  below  the  corner  of  the 
eye  there  is one smaller  in  size.   There  are  two  light  scars  of smallpox 
on the top of the nose.  
 
There  are  fine  wrinkles  on  the  upper  and  lower  eyelids  of  both  the 
eyes.    Inside  the  mouth  on  the  right  side  there  is  a  dark chihn on  the 
first molar tooth.  The tongue is pink as a lotus and has a black til on it.  
There is a black dot inside the left ear.  The forehead is broad and has 
two lines in the shape of a tilak.  On the right side of the forehead there 
is a mark below the hairline.  There is a small til on the lobe of the right 
ear.  There is a large til on the palate.  There is a til a little in front of the 
sikhã on the head while behind on the side of the sikhã there are three 
tils.  Apart from all these, there are some very small tils on his body. 
 
The murti of   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   is   beautiful,   pleasant,   strong,   and 
charming.    The murti is such  that it  attracts  the minds  and  eyes  of  the 
bhaktas who  perform  His darshan.    The murti is  the  colour  of  newly 
formed  clouds,  peaceful,  and  the  same  height  as  the murti of Shree 
Gopinãthji in  Gadhadã.    The  body of  Sahajãnand Swãmi  is  like  the 
description   in   all   the shãstras,   but   the chihns and tils have   been 
described from memory. 
 
 
Daily Routine Of Shree Hari 
 
Sahajãnand  Swãmi  wakes  up  when  there  are  three  or  four ghadis (72 
to  96  minutes)  remaining  of  the  night,  and  brushes  His  teeth.    After 
bathing,  He  wipes  His  body  with  a  clean,  thin  piece  of  cloth.    He  then 
stands  up  and  holds  the  wet  cloth,  that  He  was  wearing,  between  His 
two thighs and twists it with both His hands to squeeze the water out.  
He then wipes and dries His thighs and legs, and puts on a clean, thin, 
white dhoti and  keeps  it  very  tight.    He  covers  His  upper  body  with 
another  clean,  thin,  white  piece  of  cloth.    He  prefers  to  wear  white 
clothes.      Then,   after   completing   His   morning pujã,   He   wears   His 
chãkhadis and goes for breakfast. 
 
Shreeji Mahãrãj takes His seat.  He covers His head with a cloth, which 
He  tucks  it  behind  His  ears.    While  eating,  He  faces  north  or  east.    He 
raises His right knee, and rests His right elbow on the knee.  He has the 
habit of drinking water while He eats.  If He finds a tasty item of food, 

PARTHÃRO 
- 16 - 
He offers some to His best bhaktas.  He also has the habit of moving His 
hand on the belly after belching.  
 
Sometimes,  when  He  is  pleased with  a bhakta,  He  offers  His prasãd.  
When  He  wants  to  serve  food  to  the sãdhus,  He  keeps  His khes on  His 
left  shoulder,  and  ties  the  ends  around  His  waist.    While  serving,  He 
repeatedly  calls  the  names  of  the  different  foods  and  moves  up  and 
down   the   rows of   the sãdhus.      He   has   great   faith,   respect,   and 
happiness in feeding and serving food. 
 
In  Gadhadã, during  the seasons  of Varshã and Sharad,  when  He learns 
that  the  water  of  the  River  Ghelã  has  become  clear,  He  goes  there  to 
bathe with the sãdhus and satsangis.  Then, while praising the waters of 
the river and delighting the bhaktas, He plays with the bhaktas.  When 
He  dives  into  the  water,  He  presses  His  ears,  eyes,  and  nose  with  His 
thumbs  and  fingers.    After  diving  into  the  water,  He  comes  up  to  the 
surface  after  a  long  time.    He  gargles  with  water,  and  moves  His  right 
hand around His face.  Sometimes, He stands in the middle of the river, 
and  makes  the sãdhus sing kirtans while  clapping, and  also  joins  them 
in singing and clapping. 
 
While entering the water for bathing or while coming out after bathing, 
He  holds  the  hands  of  His bhaktas.    When  He  sees  the  happy  faces  of 
the bhaktas that  have  performed  His darshan,  He  comes  out  of  the 
water  and  stands  on  the river  bank.    He  wears  a  dry,  thin,  white dhoti 
and keeps it very tight.  He then squeezes the water from the wet dhoti 
He was wearing before.  Then, He ties a white feto on His head, with the 
cloth very close to His eyebrow, and keep a chhoglu hanging out of the 
top.  He also puts a khes on His left shoulder, and ties the ends around 
His  waist.    Finally,  He  rides  a  beautiful  horse,  and  returns  to  His 
residence while pleasing the eyes of thousands of surrounding bhaktas. 
 
While  walking, Shreeji  Mahãrãj moves  His  right  arm;  and  sometimes 
holds  a  handkerchief  in  His right  hand  and  places His  left  hand  on  His 
left  hip.    Sometimes,  He  places  a  thin,  white  cloth  over  His  shoulder, 
and  sometimes  He  puts  a khes on  His  left  shoulder,  and  ties  the  ends 
around His waist.  He has the nature of walking very fast.  He walks so 
fast  that  the bhaktas following  Him  are  hardly  able  to  keep  pace  with 
Him,  and  have  to  run  to  keep  pace  with  Him.    When  He  walks  while 
wearing chãkhadis,   the chãkhadis make   a   knocking sound   on   the 

PARTHÃRO 
- 17 - 
ground.    While  standing  when  performing  a  task  or  while  walking 
slowly,  He has  the  habit of  gently  hitting  His  right  thigh  with  His  right 
fist.    Sometimes,  when  there  is  a  great  crowd  of  people,  and  there is  a 
lot  of  dust  flying  around,  He  covers  His  nose  and  His  face  with  a 
handkerchief. 
 
Sometimes,  He  sits  on  a  decorated  cot;  sometimes  He  sits  on  a  thin 
mattress  covered  with  a  bed  sheet;  sometimes,  He  sits  on  a  thick 
cushioned seat; sometimes He sits on a square cushion; and sometimes 
He  sits  on  a  large,  cylindrical  pillow.    Sometimes,  He sits  with  His  legs 
crossed, and sometimes He sits with His legs bent and tied with a cloth.  
Sometimes  when  He  sits,  He  supports  His  back  with  a  pillow,  and  has 
the  habit  of  sitting  with  His  legs  stretched  forward,  with  one  leg 
crossed over the other.  Sometimes, He moves a finger of His right hand 
along  the urdhva-rekhã of  His  left  foot.    Sometimes,  He  keeps  His 
tongue pressed between His teeth on one side.  While sitting, He twists 
His neck on both the sides and makes a cracking sound.  Sometimes, He 
lies with  a  pillow  under  His  chest,  and  has  His  back  pressed  by  the 
bhaktas. 
 
Shreeji   Mahãrãj   turns   a mãlã of   tulsi   beads   wherever   He   sits; 
sometimes   He   playfully   moves   two   beads   at   the   same   time;   and 
sometimes  He  folds  up  the mãlã and  rubs  it  between  His  two palms; 
and when He has no mãlã in the hand, and He counts the segments on 
the fingers. 
 
Sometimes,  He  closes  His  eyes  and  performs dhyãn;  sometimes He 
performs dhyãn with  His  eyes  open;  and  sometimes  He  suddenly 
awakens from dhyãn.  Sometimes, He performs dhyãn while the sãdhus 
sing kirtans to the accompaniment of musical instruments.  Sometimes, 
He   joins   the sãdhus in   singing,   while   snapping   His   fingers;   nd 
sometimes when the sãdhus sing kirtans while clapping, He joins them 
in singing while clapping.  Sometimes, when the sãdhus sing kirtans to 
the  accompaniment  of  musical  instruments,  or  the sãdhus are  reading 
kathã before  Him,  or  He  is  giving  a  spiritual  talk,  He  gradually  moves 
closer to them.  
 
During  the kathã,  He  repeatedly  says  the  word “Hare”.    When  He  is 
carrying  out  some activity,  and  He  recalls  a  talk  from  a kathã,  He  says 
“Hare” and then when He realises that He is not listening to a kathã, He 
gently  smiles  at  the bhaktas near  Him.    Sometimes,  if  He  is  happily 

PARTHÃRO 
- 18 - 
talking,  or  is  listening  to  a kathã,  or  is  listening  to kirtans,  or  is 
engrossed in some thought, and then someone comes and calls Him for 
dinner or comes perform His pujã, He becomes very annoyed.   
 
Sometimes, He sits in the sabhã of His bhaktas and delivers talks about 
dharma, gnãn, vairãgya,  and bhakti,  and  sometimes  He  explains  the 
essence  of  Yog,  Sãnkhya,  Panch  Rãtra,  Vedãnt,  and  other shãstras.  
Sometimes,  He  raises  both  His  hands  and  claps  to  silence  the bhaktas 
and begins His talks.  Sometimes, when there may be a very large sabhã 
of bhaktas and  He  wishes  to  delivers  a  talk,  He  stands  up  so  that  He 
may  be  heard  from  a  distance,  and  raises  both  His  hands  and  claps  to 
silence the bhaktas.  Sometimes, He is so engrossed in the talk, that He 
does not notice when His upper garment is slipping.  This is His nature. 
 
Sometimes,    in    a sabhã,    Shreeji    Mahãrãj    asks    the sãdhus and 
haribhaktas to begin a question and answer session.  Then, if someone 
asks  a  difficult  question  and  if  no  one  able  to  answer  it,  He  gives  the 
reply  to  the  delight of  all.    Sometimes,  while  delivering  a  talk,  He 
crushes   a   bunch   of   flowers   or   a   large   flower   with   His   hands.  
Sometimes, while delivering a talk He has the habit of twisting the end 
of His handkerchief.  
 
He accepts the pujã that is lovingly offered by bhaktas who have come 
from other regions to celebrate festivals.  Sometimes, when the bhaktas 
come  in  large  groups  to  perform  His pujã,  He  accepts  their  garlands 
with   both   His   hands,   or   with   His   legs,   or   even   with   His   stick.  
Sometimes,  His darshan sends  a  person  into samãdhi,  and  sometimes 
He  awakens  them  from samãdhi immediately.    Sometimes,  when  He 
wishes to call someone in a sabhã, He makes a signal with His eyes, or 
He points at them with His index finger. 
Sometimes,  realising  the  cooling  effect  of  the  garlands  of mogrã,  the 
fruits,   like   lemons,   He   repeatedly   brings   them   near   to   His   eyes.  
Sometimes,  He  listens  to  the kathã,  and  sometimes  He  narrates  the 
kathã, and sometimes He asks for kirtans to be sung, and then sings the 
kirtans Himself.  
 
Shreeji Mahãrãj does not like to stay idle at any time by keeping away 
from good activities, such as constructing mandirs,  and feeding sãdhus 
and brãhmans.    He  is  very  fast  in  completing  any  work  of bhakti and 
dharma that He undertakes. 

PARTHÃRO 
- 19 - 
Whenever  He  wants  to  sneeze,  He  finds  His  handkerchief  and  holds  it 
in  front  of  His  face,  and  sneezes  so  loudly  that  it  is  heard  even  at  a 
distance.  He sneezes two or three times. 
Whenever  He  yawns,  He  loudly  says “Hare, Hare” while  rubbing  His 
eyes. 
 
Shreeji   Mahãrãj   loves   the sevã performed   by nishkãm   bhaktas.  
Sometimes,  He  playfully  laughs  loudly,  while  covering  His  mouth  with 
His  handkerchief.    Sometimes,  He  is  so  pleased  to  see  bhaktas  who 
have  come  from  other  regions,  that  He  stands  up  and  embraces  them, 
and asks about the news of their villages and towns. 
 
Sometimes,   He   happily   embraces   the sãdhus,   who   have   come   to 
celebrate  a  festival,  as  they  leave  for  other  regions.    Sometimes,  when 
He is pleased with His bhaktas, He places His hands on their heads, and 
places  His  feet  on  their  chests.    Sometimes,  when  He  is  extremely 
pleased  with  a bhakta,  He  offers  gifts,  such  as  a  garland  of  flowers,  or 
string of flowers, or His clothes and jewellery.  He is very generous.  He 
immediately gives a highly valuable item to a good person, the moment 
He decides to do so, without any delay.   
 
Sometimes,   He   cracks   the   knuckles   of   His   hands   and   feet;   and 
sometimes   He   the bhaktas sitting   nearby   to   crack   His   knuckles.  
Sometimes,  when  He  sees  or  hears  of  an  animal  suffering,  He  has  the 
nature  of  saying “Ram, Ram” out  of  compassion.   Sometimes,  when  He 
sees  any  person  suffering,  He  offers  food  and  clothes  to  ease  this 
suffering, as He feels great compassion in His heart. 
Sometimes,  if  a  person  is  hitting  someone,  He  would  not  tolerate  this, 
and  stops  the  person  by  yelling.    Sometimes,  if  someone  criticises  a 
sãdhu or  a bhakta,  He  feels  upset,  and  then  scolds  that  person  and  is 
disrespectful. Sometimes, if He feels physically unwell, He examines the 
pulse of His right hand, with the fingers of His left hand. 
 
When   He   concludes   a sabhã,   He   says “Jay  Sachidãnand” or “Jay 
Swãminãrãyan”.  Then, after bowing down to the sãdhus. He stands up.  
Sometimes, while riding a horse and travelling, He stretches one leg on 
the neck of the horse.  
 
When  He  is  going  to  sleep,  He  moves  His  fingers  on  His  forehead  as  if 
He  is  making  the tilak mark.    He  asks  for  His mãlã,  and  turns  it  in  His 

PARTHÃRO 
- 20 - 
right  hand.    While  sleeping,  He  keeps  His  face  open;  and  if  anyone 
touches Him while He is in deep sleep, He wakes up suddenly, and asks 
“Who’s there?” 
 
This description of the nature of Shreeji Mahãrãj has been written from 
memory,  and  there  are  many  more  descriptions.    He  lived  in  Gadhadã 
and delivered talks on five topics in order to remove the doubts of His 
bhaktas: svadharma ãtmã-gnãn, vairãgya, gnãn of Bhagvãn’s svarup, 
and bhakti coupled with Bhagvãn’s greatness.    These  talks,  and  many 
talks from Amdãvãd, Vadtãl and many other villages, have been written 
from  memory  to  the  best  of  our  knowledge  for  the  welfare  of  the 
bhaktas. 

GADHADÃ I 
- 21 - 
|| SHREE SWÃMINÃRAYAN VIJAYTETRÃM || 
 
VACHANÃMRUT 
Shree Gadhadã Pratham Prakaran 
 
Gadhadã I – 1 
Constantly Engaging The Mind On The Svarup Of Bhagvãn 
 
1.1
 In   the Samvat year   1876,   on   the   night  of Mãgshar sud 4   [20
th
 
November, 1819], Shreeji Mahãrãj had come to the residential hall of 
the sãdhus, in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed 
entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of sãdhus,  as  well  as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
1.2
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then asked, “What is the most difficult of all spiritual 
activities?”  
 
1.3
 The brahm-chãris, sãdhus,  and grahasthas,  answered  according  to 
their understanding, but no one could give a satisfactory reply. 
 
1.4
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Allow me to answer.  There is no spiritual 
activity  more  difficult  than  to  continuously  engage  the  mind  on  the 
svarup of Bhagvãn.    The shãstras state  that  there  is  no  greater 
achievement for a person whose mind’s vrutti is  constantly  focused 
on the murti of Bhagvãn.  This is because the murti of Bhagvãn is like 
a chintãmani.    Just  as  a  person  who  possesses  a chintãmani attains 
whatever he desires, a person whose mind’s vrutti is  constantly 
focused on the murti of Bhagvãn can instantly see, if he so wishes, the 
svarups of jeev, ishvar, Mãyã,  and Brahm.    He  can  also  see Vaikunth, 
Golok, Brahm-Mahol,  and  other dhãms of Bhagvãn.    Therefore,  there 
is   no   spiritual   activity   more   difficult,   nor   is   there   any   greater 
achievement, than to continuously engage the mind’s vrutti on  the 
murti of Bhagvãn.” 
 

GADHADÃ I 
- 22 - 
1.5
 Then,  Sheth  Govardhan-Bhãi asked Shreeji Mahãrãj, “What is the 
nature of Bhagvãn’s mãyã?” 
 
1.6
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Mãyã is anything that obstructs a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn, while he is performing dhyãn of Bhagvãn’s murti.” 
 
1.7
 Then,  Muktãnand  Swãmi  enquired,  “When  a bhakta leaves   his 
physical  body,  which  is  composed  of  the  five bhuts,  and  goes  to 
Akshardhãm, what type of body does he attain?” 
 
1.8
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  answered, “A bhakta who  has  sought  refuge  in  the 
Dharma-Kul will  attain  a brahmay body  by  the  wish  of Bhagvãn.  
When such bhaktas leave their body and go to Akshardhãm, some go 
by  sitting  on Garud,  some  go  by  sitting  on  a rath,  and  others  go  by 
sitting  on  a vimãn.    This  is  how  they  reach  the dhãm of Bhagvãn.  
Those  who  have  mastered yog-samãdhi,  can  actually  witness  these 
events.” 
 
1.9
 Then,  Harji  Thakkar  asked  Shreeji  Mahãrãj,  “Some  have  been 
practising satsang for  quite  some  time,  yet  they  do  not  have  the 
intense  love  for satsang as  they  do  for  their  own  body  and  their 
relatives.  What is the reason for this?” 
 
1.10
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “Such a person has not fully realised the 
greatness   of Bhagvãn.      When   a sant,   by   whose   association   the 
greatness  of Bhagvãn can  be  fully  realised,  talks  to  him  about  his 
svabhãv,  the  person  is  not  able  to  change  his  behaviour.    Instead,  he 
develops  hatred  towards  the sant that  has  advised  him.    It  is  due  to 
this sinful act that he does not develop intense love for satsang.  After 
all, sins committed elsewhere, are washed away by association with a 
sant.  But sins committed against a sant, are washed away only by the 
grace of  the sant himself, not  by  any  other means.   The shãstras also 
state: 
 

GADHADÃ I 
- 23 - 
anya-kshetre krutam pãpam tirth-kshetre vina-shyati 
tirth-kshetre krutam pãpam vajra-lepo bhavi-shyati 
Sins committed elsewhere are destroyed at a place of pilgrimage, 
but sins committed at a place of pilgrimage are as though etched in iron. 
 
1.11
 “Therefore, if a person does not have hatred  towards  the sant,  he 
develops intense love for satsang.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 1 || 1 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 2 
Uttam, Madhyam, And Kanishth Levels Of Vairãgya 
 
2.1
 In   the Samvat year   1876,   on   the   night   of Mãgshar sud 5   [21
st
 
November, 1819], Shreeji Mahãrãj had come to the residential hall of 
the sãdhus, in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed 
entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of sãdhus,  as  well  as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
2.2
 Then,  Mayãrãm  Bhatt  asked  Shreeji  Mahãrãj,  “Mahãrãj,  please 
describe  the  characteristics  of  the  three  levels  of vairãgya – uttam, 
madhyam, and kanishth.” 
 
2.3
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  explained,  “A  person  who  has  the uttam 
vairãgya, engages in worldly activities, either by the ãgnã of Bhagvãn, 
or  as  a  result  of  his  responsibilities;  but  like  Janak  Rãjã,  he  is  not 
affected  by  those  worldly  activities.    He  may  indulge  in  the  most 
tempting  of  the  five vishays (shabda,  sparsh,  rup,  ras,  and  gandh) 
attained  as  a  consequence  of  his  responsibilities,  but  he  does  so 
unwillingly.    Those vishays are  unable  to  attract  him,  so  his tyãg 
remains  undiminished.    He  invariably  views  those vishays as  flawed, 
and  treats  them  like  enemies.    Moreover,  he  constantly  remains  in 
contact   with sãdhus,   and shãstras,   and   remains   in   the sevã of 
Bhagvãn.  Even if he were to come across difficult desh, kãl, and sang, 

GADHADÃ I 
- 24 - 
his  understanding  would  not  weaken.    Such  a  person  is  said  to 
possess uttam vairãgya. 
 
2.4
 “A person who has madhyam vairãgya,  also  indulges  in  the  most 
appealing   of   the   five vishays and   remains   unattached   to   them.  
However,  if  he  were  to  encounter  difficult desh, kãl,  and sang,  he 
would  become  attached  to  those vishays,  causing  his vairãgya to 
decline.  Such a person is said to possess madhyam vairãgya. 
 
2.5
 “As for a person who has kanishth vairãgya,  if  he  were  to  encounter 
ordinary  or  inferior vishays,  he  may  indulge  in  them,  but  would  not 
become  bound  by  them.    However,  if  he  were  to  encounter  and 
indulge in appealing vishays, he would become bound by them.  Such 
a person is said to possess kanishth vairãgya.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 2 || 2 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 3 
Remembering The Leelãs Of Bhagvãn 
 
3.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on  the  night  of Mãgshar sud 6  [22
nd
 
November, 1819], Shreeji Mahãrãj was sitting in Dãdã Khãchar’s 
darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A 
sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had 
gathered before Him. 
  
3.2
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Even a person who can constantly see the 
murti of Bhagvãn in  his  heart,  should  recall  the leelãs performed  by 
Bhagvãn in  His  different avatãrs in  different  places.    He  should  also 
maintain  love  for brahm-chãris, sãdhus and satsangis,  and  should 
always remember them.  If at the time of death he forgets the murti of 
Bhagvãn, but remembers the leelãs performed by Him in the different 
places, or if he remembers satsangis, brahm-chãris or sãdhus, then he 
will  also  remember  the murti of Bhagvãn.    In  this  way,  that  person 
attains  a  high  spiritual  status  and  benefits  greatly.    That  is  why  I 

GADHADÃ I 
- 25 - 
perform    grand Vishnu-yãgs,     annually    celebrate Janamãshtmi, 
Ekãdashi,  and  other  festivals,  and  gather brahm-chãris, sãdhus and 
satsangis on  these  occasions.    Even  a  sinner  who  remembers  these 
occasions at the time of death, can attain Akshardhãm.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 3 || 3 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 4 
Jealousy Like That Of Nãradji 
 
4.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on Mãgshar sud 7  [23
rd
 November,  1819], 
Shreeji Mahãrãj was sitting in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He 
was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of sãdhus,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
4.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Haribhaktas should  not  have  jealousy 
amongst each other.”   
 
4.3
 Ãnandãnand  Swãmi  replied,  “Mahãrãj,  even  then  jealousy  still 
remains.”  
 
4.4
 Hearing  this,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  explained  “If  a  person  does  hold 
jealousy  within  them,  it  should  be  like  that  of Nãradji.   Once,  both 
Nãradji and  Tumbru  went  to Vaikunth for  the darshan of Lakshmi-
Nãrãyan.    There,  Tumbru  sang  before  them.    Both Lakshmiji and 
Nãrãyan were  so  pleased  that  they  rewarded  him  with  their  clothes 
and  jewellery.    Seeing  this Nãradji became  jealous  of  Tumbru,  and 
thought, ‘I  shall  also  learn  to  sing  like  Tumbru,  so  I  can  please 
Bhagvãn’. 
 
4.5
 “Nãradji learned  the  art  of  singing,  and  sang  before Bhagvãn.    But 
Bhagvãn replied, ‘You do not know how to sing like Tumbru’.  Then, 
Nãradji performed tap to  please Shiv,  and  received  his  blessings  to 
master  the  art  of  singing.    However,  when  he  sang  again, Bhagvãn 

GADHADÃ I 
- 26 - 
still was not pleased with his singing.  So he practised his singing for 
seven manvantars.  Despite this, Bhagvãn still was not pleased. 
 
4.6
 “Finally, Nãradji learned to sing from Tumbru himself, and then sang 
before Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn in  Dvãrikã.    Only  then  was Shree 
Krishna pleased,   and   rewarded Nãradji with   His   clothes   and 
jewellery.  Nãradji then abandoned his jealousy towards Tumbru. 
 
4.7
 “Therefore, if a person is to hold jealousy within themselves, then he 
should perceive the gun of the person that he is jealous of.  He should 
also  abandon  his  own avgun.    If  this  cannot  be  done,  then  a bhakta 
should at least totally abandon any form of jealousy that would result 
in harming another bhakta.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 4 || 4 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 5 
Persistency In Dhyãn 
 
5.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on Mãgshar sud 8  [24
th
 November,  1819], 
Shreeji Mahãrãj was sitting in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He 
was dressed entirely in white clothes.  A sabhã of paramhans, as well 
as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
5.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “A person should perform dhyãn upon 
Shree Krishna Bhagvãn together with Rãdhikãji.  If he cannot hold the 
murti within  the  heart  whilst  performing dhyãn,  he  should  not  lose 
faith and  stop  the dhyãn like  a coward.   Those  who  are  persistent in 
this  way  will  earn  the  immense  grace  and darshan of Bhagvãn.  
Moreover, Bhagvãn will be bound by their bhakti.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 5 || 5 || 
 

GADHADÃ I 
- 27 - 
Gadhadã I – 6 
A Person With Wisdom And A Person Without Wisdom 
 
6.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on Mãgshar sud 9,  [25
th
 November,  1819], 
Shreeji Mahãrãj was sitting in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He 
was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
6.2
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “In satsang,   a   person   who   is   wise, 
increasingly   finds avgun within   himself,   and   perceives gun in 
Bhagvãn and His bhakta.  Moreover, when Bhagvãn and His sant utter 
harsh  words  of  advice  for  his  own  benefit,  he  accepts  them  as 
beneficial,  and  is  not  hurt  by  them.    Such  a  person  steadily  attains 
greatness in satsang. 
 
6.3
 “Conversely,  a  person  who  lacks  wisdom,  practices satsang and 
listens  to  talk  about satsang,  but  continually  perceives gun within 
himself.    When Bhagvãn and  His sant highlight  his avgun and  advise 
him, he misinterprets such advice due to his arrogance.  He perceives 
avgun in  the  person  advising  him.    Such  a  person  steadily  declines, 
and loses his reputation in satsang.  Therefore, if a person abandons 
the  pride  of  his  own gun,  and  remains  brave,  and  keeps  faith  in 
Bhagvãn and  His sant,  his  ignorance  is  eradicated,  and  he  attains 
greatness in satsang.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 6 || 6 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 7 
Anvay And Vyatirek 
 
7.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on Mãgshar sud 9  [26
th
 November,  1819], 
Shreeji Mahãrãj was sitting in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He 

GADHADÃ I 
- 28 - 
was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
7.2
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “No  one  is  able to   understand   the 
philosophical   principles   found   in   the shãstras.      In   fact,   all   are 
confused   by   them.      Therefore,   please   listen   as   I   explain   those 
principles precisely as they are. 
 
7.3
 “When the jeev behaves  as  if  united  with  the  three  bodies  of sthul, 
sukshma, and kãran, it is known as the anvay form of the jeev.  When 
the jeev is  distinct from  these  three  bodies  and  described  as  eternal, 
it is known as the vyatirek form of the jeev. 
 
7.4
 “Ishvar,  when  together  with  its  three  bodies  of virãt, sutrãtmã, and 
avyãkrut, is its anvay form.  When ishvar is distinct from these three 
bodies and is described as eternal, it is known as the vyatirek form of 
ishvar. 
 
7.5
 “When Akshar-Brahm pervades Mãyã and  the  countless  millions  of 
brahmãnds that  evolve  from Mãyã,  it  is  said  to  be  in  its anvay form.  
When Mãyã is  distinct  from  everything  and  has  the  attributes  of 
sachidãnand, it is known as the vyatirek form of the Mãyã. 
 
7.6
 “When Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn is  the antaryãmi and  the controller  of 
Akshar-Brahm,  the ishvars,  the jeevs, Mãyã and  the brahmãnds that 
evolve  from Mãyã, it is  said  to  be  the anvay form  of Bhagvãn.   When 
He is distinct from all and resides amidst the light of Brahm in Golok, 
it is said to be the vyatirek form of Bhagvãn. 
 
7.7
  “These five entities – Purushottam  Bhagvãn,  Akshar-Brahm,  Mãyã, 
ishvar, and jeev – are eternal.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 7 || 7 || 
 

GADHADÃ I 
- 29 - 
Gadhadã I – 8 
Engaging The Indriyas In The Sevã Of Bhagvãn And His Sant 
 
8.1 
In the Samvat year 1876, on Mãgshar sud 11 [27
th
 November, 1819], 
Shreeji Mahãrãj was sitting in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He 
was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of sãdhus,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him.  
 
8.2
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “If the indriyas are  engaged  in  the sevã of 
Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn and  His bhakta,  then  the antah-karans are 
purified  and  the  sins,  which  have  been  attached  to  the jeev for 
eternity,  are  destroyed.    On  the  other  hand,  if  the vruttis  of  the 
indriyas are   directed   towards   women   and   other vishays,   then   a 
person’s antah-karans become polluted and he falls from the path of 
kalyãn. 
 
8.3
 “Therefore, a person should indulge in the vishays only as prescribed 
in  the shãstras,  but  should  never  indulge  in  them  by  disobeying  the 
niyams that are described in the shãstras.  Also, a person should keep 
the company of a sant and should avoid kusang.  In this way, when a 
person  avoids kusang and  keeps  the  company  of  a sant,  the  sense  of 
‘I-ness’ that he has towards his body and the sense of ‘my-ness’ that 
he has towards his bodily relations, are destroyed.  He also develops 
profound  love  for Bhagvãn,  and vairãgya towards  everything  except 
Bhagvãn.”  
 
8.4
 Then,  on  that  same  day,  three  hours  after  sunrise,  Swãmi  Shree 
Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj was sitting in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr,  facing 
the  neem  tree.    A sabhã of paramhans was  seated  underneath  the 
neem   tree.   Grahastha satsangis were  also   seated   in   the sabhã.  
Sãnkhya-yogi and female bhaktas were also seated in the sabhã. 
 
8.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Paramhans.  Talk about your strengths in 
satsang; and if there is a weakness, then do no talk about it.  Only talk 

GADHADÃ I 
- 30 - 
about  the  strengths.    Whoever  has  firm nishchay in Bhagvãn,  should 
talk  about  that;  and  whoever  has  great  knowledge  about  the ãtmã, 
should  talk  about  that – ‘I am not a body; I am an ãtmã’.    Also,  those 
who  have  the  strength  of  one  of  the  five  qualities – nirlobhi,  or 
nishkãmi,   or nispruhi,   or nisvãdi,   or nirmãni – talk   about   your 
strength.” 
 
8.6
 Then,   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   happily   said, “First,  I  will  talk  about  my 
strength.  Then, you will talk about your strength.” 
 
8.7
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “By the grace of Nar-Nãrãyan,  I  know  I 
am  an ãtmã,  I  am achhedhya,  I  am abhedhya,  and  I  am sachidãnand.  
My greatness is due to the strength of my own svarup, and upãsanã of 
Nar-Nãrãyan;  it  is  not  due  to  expensive  clothes,  valuable  jewellery, 
chariots, pãlkhi, elephants, and horses.  Also, my greatness is not due 
to  all  the satsangi men  and  kings  in  the  world  standing  before  me 
with   folded   hands.      If   they   were   to   leave satsang and   become 
vimukhs, and if I do not have clothes to wear or a place to live, I will 
not  feel  inferior.    My upãsanã of Nar-Nãrãyan is  the  cause  of  my 
greatness,  and  it  is  the  reason  that  I  know ‘I am brahm’, and how I 
know ‘I am an ãtmã’.  If I try to leave my greatness, or if other devs try 
to reduce my greatness, it still will not diminish. 
 
8.8
 “My upãsanã of  the Nar-Nãrãyan,  who  is Parbrahm and Paramãtmã, 
is  such  that ‘This Bhagvãn has  a sãkãr murti’.    If  someone  speaks  of 
their  experiences,  or  uses shãstras to  convince  me  that Bhagvãn is 
nirãkãr,  I  will  never  trust  their  talks.    This  is  because,  due  to  His 
grace, I can see the sãkãr svarup of Bhagvãn in front of me. 
8.9
 “In my heart,  I  understand  that  those  who  say Bhagvãn is nirãkãr, 
have not fully understood Him, have never had darshan of His svarup, 
and  they  do  not understand  the shãstras.    In  the shãstras,  those  who 
have written that Bhagvãn has a nirãkãr svarup, have written this to 
show   that Bhagvãn’s svarup is   not   like   our mãyik svarup.      In 
Bhagvãn’s physical  body,  the  features  that  can  be  destroyed – five 

GADHADÃ I 
- 31 - 
bhuts,  ten indriyas,  four antah-karans – are  not  like  those  found  in 
humans.      It  is   for   this  reason   that   the shãstras have described 
Bhagvãn as nirãkãr. 
 
8.10
 “The indriyas that  are  in Bhagvãn’s body  cannot  be  destroyed.    With 
his  eyes,  he  looks  towards Purush,  who  then  looks  towards Mãyã.  
This  causes  millions  of  universes  to  evolve  from Mãyã.    In  these 
universes,  the devs evolve,  and  in  each  universe,  the sthãvar and 
jangam objects form.  This proves that Bhagvãn has eyes. 
 
8.11
 “Then, when the universe and all the sthãvar and jangam objects are 
destroyed, and mahã-pralay occurs, only Bhagvãn remains.  The Veds 
then  pray  to Bhagvãn.    Listening  to  these  prayers,  he  creates  the 
universe again.  This proves that Bhagvãn has ears. 
 
8.12
 “In this way, there are fourteen indriyas, which are alokik and cannot 
be explained. 
 
8.13
 “Through physical svarups, such as Rãm and Krishna, Bhagvãn comes 
to  earth  for  the kalyãn of  the jeevs.    Due  to  his  extreme  compassion, 
he takes a svarup that can be seen by the jeev.  Bhagvãn believes that 
if  he  does  not  take  a  physical svarup that can  be seen,  then how  will 
the jeev perform dhyãn, smaran, and pujã?   For this reason, Bhagvãn 
takes a pratyaksha svarup that can be seen by all – both satsangis and 
kusangis. 
 
8.14
 “But, Bhagvãn is  the  way  He  is.    His indriyas or  body  do  not  become 
mãyik just because the jeev is able to see Him.  For this reason, I can 
never believe anyone who claims that Bhagvãn is nirãkãr. 
8.15
 “If all the females in the universe come to my sevã,  and  if  all  the 
objects in the universe are offered to me, I will not become attached 
to  them.    This  is  due  to  the  strength  from  my upãsanã of Nar-
Nãrãyan.  But, even if I do become attracted to these objects, I am not 
attached to them.  This is due to the grace of my Bhagvãn, who allows 
me to have firm knowledge of my own svarup. 
 

GADHADÃ I 
- 32 - 
8.16
 “I do not know how to give someone a son, give money,  make  the 
dead come alive, or kill someone.  But, I do know how to give kalyãn 
to  a jeev,  and  take  that jeev to Akshardhãm.    I  shall  not  speak 
anymore.  If I do speak, I will end up speaking more than I should.” 
 
8.17
 Saying  all  this,  Mahãrãj  looked  at all  the paramhans,  with  cool  eyes 
like the season of Sharad.  He then said, “Now, talk about your own 
strengths in satsang.” 
 
8.18
 Mahãrãj then said, “You and I have the same strengths.  Therefore, 
my  strengths  are  a  part  of  you.    Keep  firm nishchay in  everything  I 
have said today.”  In this way, Mahãrãj explained his own strengths in 
satsang for  the  benefit  of  the bhaktas.    In  reality,  He  Himself  is 
Purushottam Nãrãyan. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 8 || 8 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 9 
Desire For The Pratyaksha Svarup Of Bhagvãn 
 
9.1
 In the Samvat year 1876, on Mãgshar sud 12 [28
th
 November, 1819], 
Shreeji Mahãrãj was sitting in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He 
was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
9.2
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “Suppose  a  person  has  developed 
nishchay in pratyaksha Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn,  offers bhakti to  Him, 
and  has  His darshan.    But,  despite  this,  he  still  does  not  consider 
himself  fulfilled,  and  instead,  feels  a  deficiency  within  his antah-
karans.  He thinks, ‘As long as I have not seen the radiant svarup of this 
very  same  Bhagvãn  in  Golok,  Vaikunth,  and  other  dhãms,  I  have  not 
attained ultimate kalyãn’.    Talks  about Bhagvãn should  not  be heard 
from a person with such ignorance. 
 
9.3
 “If  a  person  has  firm nishchay in pratyaksha   Bhagvãn,   believes 
himself to be fulfilled merely by His darshan and desires nothing else, 

GADHADÃ I 
- 33 - 
then Bhagvãn Himself  forcefully  shows  him  His  divine  powers  and 
murtis in His dhãms. 
 
9.4
 “Therefore, a person with firm nishchay in Bhagvãn,  should  desire 
nothing, except pratyaksha Bhagvãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 9 || 9 ||   
 
 
Gadhadã I – 10 
The Ungrateful Sevak-Rãm 
 
10.1
 In the Samvat year 1876, on Mãgshar sud 13 [29
th
 November, 1819], 
Shreeji Mahãrãj was sitting in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He 
was dressed entirely in white clothes.  A sabhã of paramhans, as well 
as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
10.2
 Then,   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   said,  “Once,  when  I  was  travelling  from 
Venkatãdri  to  Setubandh  Rãmeshvar,  I  came  across  a sãdhu by  the 
name  of  Sevak-Rãm.    He  had  studied  Shreemad  Bhãgvat  and  other 
Purãns.    During  his  journey,  he  fell  ill.    With  him,  he  had  a  thousand 
rupees worth of gold coins.  However, as he had no one to nurse him, 
he  began  to  cry.    I  consoled  him,  and  said, ‘Do not worry about 
anything.  I shall look after you’. 
 
10.3
 “On the outskirts of the village, there was a banana orchard, where 
there  was  a  banyan  tree  that  was home  to  a  thousand  ghosts.    The 
sãdhu had become extremely ill and was unable to walk any further.  
I felt extreme pity for him.  So I prepared a bed of banana leaves one-
and-a-half   feet  high   under   the   banyan   tree.     As   the sãdhu was 
suffering  from  dysentery  and  was  passing  blood,  I  would  wash  him 
and attend to him. 
 
10.4
 “He would give me enough of his money to buy sugar, ghee, and 
grains  for  himself.    I  would  bring  the  ingredients,  cook  them,  and 

GADHADÃ I 
- 34 - 
then feed him.  As for myself, I would go to the village for my meals.  
On some days, when I did not receive any food from the village, I had 
to  do upvãs.    Despite  this,  that sãdhu never  once  said  to  me, ‘I have 
enough money.  Cook for both of us so that you may dine with me’. 
 
10.5
 “After serving the sãdhu for  two  months  in  this  way  he  began  to 
recover.    Then,  as  we  walked  towards  Setubandh  Rãmeshvar,  he 
made  me  carry  his  belongings  weighing  about  twenty  kilograms, 
whereas  he  walked  with  only  a mãlã in  his  hand.    By  then,  he  was 
healthy  and  capable  of  digesting  half  a  kilogram  of  ghee,  yet  he  still 
made  me  carry  his  load  while  he  walked  empty-handed.    In  actual 
fact,  my  nature  was  such  that  I  would  not  keep  even  a  handkerchief 
with  me.    But  respecting  him  as  a sãdhu,  I  walked  carrying  his 
belongings weighing twenty kilograms. 
 
10.6
 “Although I served that sãdhu and  helped  him  recover,  he  did  not 
offer me even a single penny worth of food.  Therefore, realising him 
to  be  ungrateful,  I  abandoned  his  company.    In  this  way,  a  person 
who does not appreciate favours done by others should be known as 
a krutaghni.  
 
10.7
 “In addition, if a person has committed a sin but has performed the 
prãyshchit for   it   as   written   in   the shãstras,   then   whoever   still 
considers  him  a  sinner  should  himself  be  considered  a  sinner,  just 
like a krutaghni.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 10 || 10 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 11 
Vãsnã And Ekãntik Bhakta 
 
11.1
 In the Samvat year 1876, on Mãgshar sud 14 [30
th
 November, 1819], 
Shreeji Mahãrãj was sitting in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He 
was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 

GADHADÃ I 
- 35 - 
11.2
 Then, Brahmãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, what  is  the  nature  of 
vãsnã?” 
 
11.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “A desire within the antah-karans to enjoy 
vishays that  have  been  previously  seen,  heard,  or  encountered,  is 
called vãsnã.    Moreover,  a  desire  within  the antah-karans to  enjoy 
vishays that  have  not  previously  been  encountered,  is  also  called 
vãsnã.” 
 
11.4
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, who can we call an ekãntik 
bhakta of Bhagvãn?” 
 
11.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A person who has no vãsnã other  than 
Bhagvãn, and who thinks himself to be brahm-rup as he offers bhakti 
to Bhagvãn, is known as an ekãntik bhakta.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 11 || 11 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 12 
Creation And Destruction 
 
12.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on Mãgshar sud Punam [1
st
 December, 
1819],  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  in  Dãdã  Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of 
sãdhus,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before Him. 
 
12.2
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “When a person understands the nature of 
the  causes  of  the  entire  creation,  specifically Purush, Prakruti, Kãl, 
and   the   twenty-four tattvas,   including maha-tattva,   then   he   is 
released from the bondage of his avidyã, and the twenty-four tattvas 
that evolve from avidyã.” 
 
12.3
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, how can their nature  be 
known?” 

GADHADÃ I 
- 36 - 
12.4
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Their nature can be realised by knowing 
their characteristics.  I shall now describe those characteristics. 
 
12.5
 “Purush is the controller of Prakruti, and is also distinct from her.  He 
is  indivisible,  without  a  beginning,  and  without  an  end.    He  is  self-
luminous, omniscient, imperishable, satya, kshetragna, and the cause 
of all the activities that possess a form.  Also, he has a divya body. 
 
12.6
 “Prakruti is composed of the three gun.  She is both jad and chaitanya, 
eternal, nirvishesh,  the kshetra of  all  the jeevs and  all  the  elements, 
including maha-tattva.  She is also the divine power of Bhagvãn. 
 
12.7
 “Mãyã is nirvishesh,  and  the three gun of Mãyã are  normally  in  the 
state of equilibrium.  That which disturbs Mãyã, is called Kãl. 
 
12.8
 “Now I shall describe the characteristics of maha-tattva and the other 
elements, so please listen. 
 
12.9
 “Chitt and maha-tattva should  not  be  regarded  as  being  different.  
The  entire  world  resides  in  a  small  form  within maha-tattva,  which 
itself is unchanging, luminous, pure, peaceful, and full of pure sattva-
gun. 
 
12.10
 “Ahankãr is  composed  of  the  three gun,  and  is  the  cause  of  the 
evolution of all bhuts, indriyas, antah-karans, their presiding devs, and 
the prãns.  It is peaceful, dense, and totally ignorant.  
 
12.11
 “The man is  the  place  where  all  the  desires  for  women  and  other 
objects  are  generated.    It  is  subject  to  random  thoughts,  and  is  the 
controller of all the indriyas. 
 
12.12
 “Buddhi possesses  the  knowledge  of  all  the  objects.    The  specific 
knowledge  which  all  the indriyas possess,  is  due  to  the buddhi.    Its 
natural features are sanshay, nishchay, nindrã, and smruti. 
  

GADHADÃ I 
- 37 - 
12.13
 “The characteristics of the ten indriyas – the  ears  (shrotra),  the  skin 
(tvak),  the  eyes  (chakshu),  the  tongue  (rasnã),  the  nose  (ghran),  the 
voice (vãk), the hands (pãni), the feet (pãd), the anus (pãyu), and the 
genitals  (upastha) – is  to  connect  themselves  in  their  respective 
vishays. 
 
12.14
 “Shabda is the indicator of all objects.  Shabda is the cause of all social 
interactions,  and  reveals  the  nature  and  class  of  the  speaker.    It 
dwells within ãkãsh, and is also the physical element of ãkãsh, and is 
perceived by the ears. 
 
12.15
 “Sparsh is  the  physical  element  of vãyu.    Softness,  hardness,  cold, 
heat, and perception by the skin, are the characteristics of sparsh. 
 
12.16
 “Rup reveals the appearance of all objects.  It resides in all objects in a 
small form, and changes as objects change.  It is the physical element 
of tej, and is perceived by the eyes. 
 
12.17
 “The characteristics of ras are  sweetness,  spiciness,  distastefulness, 
bitterness,  sourness,  and  saltiness.    It  is  the  physical  element  of jal, 
and is perceived by the tongue. 
 
12.18
 “The characteristics of gandh are  fragrance  and  stench.    It  is  the 
physical element of pruthvi, and is perceived by the nose. 
 
12.19
 “Pruthvi supports  all jeevs,  and  in  the  form  of  a  physical  body,  the 
pruthvi is  their  home.    It  separates  the  other  four bhuts,  and  gives  a 
physical form to all life-forms. 
12.20
 “Jal binds pruthvi and  other  substances,  and  it  also  softens  and 
moistens   all   objects.      It   satisfies   and   sustains   all   life-forms,   it 
quenches thirst, and suppresses heat. 
 
12.21
 “Tej is  luminosity,  the  cause  of  the  digestion  of  food  and  absorbs 
liquids.  It eliminates cold, is the cause of drying, creates hunger and 
thirst, and is the cause of burning wood and ghee. 
 

GADHADÃ I 
- 38 - 
12.22
 “Vãyu causes  trees  to  shake,  and  it  gathers  leaves  and  other  small 
objects.  It also carries the five vishays – shabda, sparsh, rup, ras, and 
gandh – to their indriyas.  It is the vital force of all the indriyas. 
 
12.23
 “Ãkãsh provides  space  for  all jeevs,  and  is  the  cause  of  the  internal 
and  external  activities  of  the  bodies.    It  is  also  where  the prãns, 
indriyas, and antah-karans reside. 
 
12.24
 “In  this  way,  by  knowing  the  characteristics  of  the  twenty-four 
tattvas, Prakruti, Purush,  and Kãl,  a  person  is freed  from  ignorance.  
In addition to knowing the characteristics, a person should also know 
the process of their creation. 
 
12.25
 “While residing in His dhãm, Shree Krishna Bhagvãn impregnates the 
womb  of Mãyã through Akshar-Purush,  through  whom  countless 
millions  of Pradhãn and Purush are  produced.    What  are  those 
Pradhãn-Purush pairs like?  Well, they are the cause of the creation of 
countless millions of brahmãnds.  Of these, I shall now tell you about 
one Pradhãn-Purush pair – the cause of the creation of one brahmãnd. 
 
12.26
 “Firstly, Purushottam Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn,  in  the  form  of Purush, 
impregnated  the  womb  of Pradhãn.    From  the Pradhãn, maha-tattva 
evolved.    From maha-tattva,  the  three  types  of ahankãr evolved.    Of 
these,  from sãttvik-ahankãr,  the man and  the  presiding devs of  the 
indriyas evolved; from rãjas-ahankãr,  the  ten indriyas,  the buddhi, 
and  the prãns evolved;  and  from tãmas-ahankãr,  the  five bhuts and 
the five tanmãtras evolved.  These tattvas were created in this way. 
 
12.27
 “Then, inspired  by  the  will  of Bhagvãn,  each tattva with  its  own 
components, helped create the bodies of the ishvars and the jeevs.  A 
particular ishvar’s bodies are known as virãt, sutrãtmã, and avyãkrut.  
A particular jeev’s bodies are known as sthul, sukshma, and kãran. 
 
12.28
 “The body of ishvar,  called virãt,  has  a  lifespan  of  two parãrdhs.  
Fourteen manvantars pass, during one of Virãt-Purush’s days, and his 

GADHADÃ I 
- 39 - 
night  is  the same  duration  as  the day.    During  his day,  the  lower  ten 
loks of  the brahmãnd remain  in  existence;  and  after  his  night  falls, 
they are destroyed.  This is called nimit-pralay. 
 
12.29
 “When the two parãrdhs of Virãt-Purush have  passed,  the  body  of 
Virãt is  destroyed,  along  with  Satya-Lok  and  the  other loks.    At  that 
time, Pradhãn-Prakruti, Purush,    and    the    twenty-four tattvas, 
including maha-tattva,  are  absorbed  back  onto Mahã-Mãyã.    This  is 
called prãkrut-pralay. 
 
12.30
 “When that Mahã-Mãyã is  absorbed  by  the  divine  light  of Akshar-
Brahm – like  the  night  merges  into  the  day – it  is  called ãtyantik-
pralay.    Also,  the  day-to-day  death  of  the  bodies  of  individual devs, 
demons, and humans, is called nitya-pralay. 
 
12.31
 “In this way, by knowing the process of the creation, sustenance, and 
destruction,  a  person  develops vairãgya towards  the  world,  and 
bhakti towards Bhagvãn.    Also,  when  all  of  those brahmãnds are 
destroyed,  all  other jeevs lie  dormant  within Mãyã,  whereas the 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn attain the dhãm of Bhagvãn.” 
 
12.32
 Again Muktãnand Swãmi enquired, “What is the dhãm of Bhagvãn 
like?” 
 
12.33
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “The dhãm of Bhagvãn is   without   a 
beginning  and  without  an  end.    It  is  infinite,  indivisible, divya and 
sachidãnand.  I shall describe it using an analogy. 
 
12.34
 “Imagine  that  this  whole  world,  with  all  the  mountains,  trees, 
humans,  animals,  and  all  other  life-forms,  is  made  of  glass.    Also, 
imagine  that  all  the  stars  in  the  sky  are  as  bright  as  the sun.    Then, 
just  as  the  glass  world  would  glow  with  extreme  beauty  amidst  this 
radiance,  the dhãm of Bhagvãn is  similarly  beautiful.   Bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn see  this  in samãdhi and  attain  that  luminous dhãm after 
death.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 12 || 12 || 

GADHADÃ I 
- 40 - 
Gadhadã I – 13 
How Many Jeevs Are Within Each Body? 
 
13.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on Mãgshar  vad 1  [2
nd
 December,  1819], 
Shreeji Mahãrãj was sitting on a decorated bedstead under the neem 
tree  near  the mandir of Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan,  in  Dãdã  Khãchar’s 
darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was wearing a red survãl and a red dagli.  He 
had  tied  a  golden shelu around  His  head,  and  another  golden shelu 
was  tied  around  His  waist.    Pearl  necklaces  hung  around  His  neck, 
and tassels of pearls were dangling from His pãgh.  A sabhã of munis, 
as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
13.2
 Then, Nityãnand Swãmi asked, “Within each body, is there only one 
jeev,  or  many?    If  you  say  there  is  only  one jeev,  then  when  the 
branches  of  a  banyan,  a  pipal,  or  other  trees  are  cut  and  planted 
elsewhere,  exactly  the  same  type  of  trees  grows  there  as  well.    Has 
that one jeev been dissected into two, or has another jeev entered the 
new  tree?    If  you  say  it  is  the  same jeev,  then  how  has  a jeev been 
divided?  A jeev is said to be whole and indivisible.” 
 
13.3
 Hearing  this,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “I  shall  answer  the  question.  
Purush and Prakruti are  the  two  powers  of Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn.  
He  is  the  cause  of  the  creation,  sustenance,  and  destruction  of  this 
universe.    Through  His  two  powers  of Purush and Prakruti,  He 
assumed   the   form   of Virãt.      Then,   during   the   first brãhm-kalp, 
Bhagvãn gave  all  beings, from Brahmã to  the smallest  blade  of  grass 
their bodies, through His own body in the form of Virãt. 
 
13.4
 “Then, during the pãdma-kalp, Bhagvãn gave Marichi and others their 
respective   bodies,   through   the   form   of Brahmã.      Then,   through 
Kashyap and Daksh, He gave the devs, demons, humans, animals, and 
all  the sthãvar and jangam life-forms,  their  bodies.    That Shree 
Krishna Bhagvãn,  along  with  His  powers  in  the  form  of Purush and 
Prakruti, resides as antaryãmi in all jeevs, and grants each jeev a body 
according to its past karmas. 

GADHADÃ I 
- 41 - 
13.5
 “That jeev, in its past lives, has performed many karmas – some with 
sattva-gun predominating,  some  with rajo-gun predominating,  and 
some  with tamo-gun predominating.    As  a  consequence  of  those 
karmas, Bhagvãn grants  that jeev a  body  of  the udbhij type,  or  the 
jarãyuj type,  or  the svedaj type,  or  the andaj type.   Bhagvãn also 
grants the jeev the rewards of its karmas in the form of happiness and 
misery. 
 
13.6
 “In addition, Bhagvãn makes  the  body  of  that jeev give  birth  to 
another body, according to its own karmas.  Just as Bhagvãn created 
various life-forms from the bodies of Kashyap and the prajãpatis, that 
same Bhagvãn, while residing in all jeevs as antaryãmi, creates other 
bodies  from  one  body  by  methods  appropriate  to  that  particular 
body.    However,  the jeev,  through  which  other  bodies  are  created, 
does  not  itself  multiply  into  many  forms.   Bhagvãn grants  birth  to  a 
jeev, through the body of another jeev, according to the relation of the 
karmas between the two jeevs.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 13 || 13 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 14 
Grahastha And Sant 
Qualities Of A Dãs Of Bhagvãn 
 
14.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on Mãgshar  vad 2,  [3
rd
 December,  1819], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated 
bedstead under the neem tree opposite the mandir of Shree Vãsudev-
Nãrãyan, facing south, in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He had 
tied a white pãgh around His head.  He was also wearing a white khes, 
and  had  covered  Himself  with  a chãdar.    Also,  tassels  of  yellow 
flowers  decorated  His pãgh.    Bunches  of yellow  flowers  had  been 
placed  above  both  of  His  ears,  with  roses  decorating  those  bunches.  
He  was  wearing  garlands  of  yellow  flowers  around  His  neck.    With 

GADHADÃ I 
- 42 - 
His right hand, He was playing with a white sevati flower.  A sabhã of 
munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before Him. 
 
14.2
 Shreeji   Mahãrãj   then   asked   the munis,  “Suppose  there  are  two 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn.    One  is  a tyãgi,  and  has  abandoned  worldly  life.  
Although  he  does  not  have  intense vairãgya,  he  physically  abides  by 
the vartmãns thoroughly.    However,  he  still  has  a  slight  desire  for 
worldly life in his mind, but he overcomes this by a thought process.  
He also has firm nishchay in Bhagvãn.  Such is the tyãgi.  In contrast, 
there  is  another bhakta,  a grahastha.    He  also  has  firm nishchay in 
Bhagvãn.    Even  though  he  has  remained  a grahastha by Bhagvãn’s 
ãgnã, he is disinterested in worldly life.  He has the same intensity of 
worldly desires as the tyãgi.  Of these two bhaktas of Bhagvãn, who is 
better?” 
 
14.3
 Muktãnand Swãmi replied, “The tyãgi bhakta is better.” 
 
14.4
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “The tyãgi abandoned worldly of his own 
accord,  out  of  frustration – so  how  can  he  be  better?    On  the  other 
hand, the grahastha has stayed at home because of Bhagvãn’s ãgnã – 
so how can he be inferior?” 
 
14.5
 Muktãnand Swãmi attempted to answer Shreeji Mahãrãj’s question 
in many ways, but was unable to give a satisfactory response.  Then, 
he said, “Mahãrãj, please answer the question yourself.” 
 
14.6
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “If a tyãgi who  is  weak-minded  receives 
rich  foods  to  eat,  then  desires  for  worldly  life  will  be  revived  within 
his  heart.    Or,  if  he  encounters  many  hardships,  the  desires  for 
worldly life will be revived.  Compared to such a tyãgi, a grahastha is 
much  better,  because  whenever  a grahastha encounters  times  of 
extreme  hardship  or  even  times  of  great  pleasure,  he  is  always 
cautious,  just  in  case  he  becomes  attached  to  these  pleasures.    With 

GADHADÃ I 
- 43 - 
this awareness, he remains disinterested in worldly life.  Therefore, a 
true tyãgi is a person who has no desires for worldly life after he has 
abandoned it. 
 
14.7
 “But keep in mind that a grahastha is  much  better  than  a tyãgi with 
worldly   desires,   only   if   he   follows   the dharma prescribed   for 
grahasthas.    The grahastha’s dharma is  extremely  difficult  to  follow 
because countless occasions of good and bad times are encountered.  
Despite  this,  a  true grahastha’s mind does not waver from serving 
sant or  from  following  his dharma.    He  also  realises ‘The profound 
association  of  the  sant  that  I  have  attained  is  like  a  magnificent 
chintãmani   and   a   kalp-vruksh.      My   wealth,   property,   sons,   and 
daughters,  are  merely  like  a  dream.    The  deep  association  of  the  sant 
that I have attained is the only true benefit of life’.  Moreover, he does 
not become disheartened amidst any type of hardship that may come 
his way.  Such a grahastha is by far the better of the two.  Therefore, 
of  all  things,  becoming  a bhakta of Bhagvãn is  very  difficult;  and  to 
attain the association of the bhaktas of Bhagvãn is very rare indeed.” 
 
14.8
 Having  spoken  in  this  way,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  arranged  for  the 
singing of kirtans written by Muktãnand Swãmi. 
 
14.9
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “The Shrutis state: 
 
ante yã matihi sã gatihi 
Whatever a person’s mental state is like at the time of his death, 
will also be the state of his jeev after his death. 
 
“If a person’s mind is fixed on Bhagvãn at  the  time  of  death,  he  will 
attain a pleasant fate after death.  Otherwise, he will not.  This is the 
interpretation  of  the  Vedic shlok.    If  this  is  so,  then  what  is  the 
significance  of  the bhakti a  person  has  performed  throughout  his 
life?” 
 

GADHADÃ I 
- 44 - 
14.10
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “A person who has been graced with 
pratyaksha Bhagvãn, never falls from the path of kalyãn, regardless of 
whether or not he is conscious and aware of his physical body at the 
time of death.  He is protected by Bhagvãn. 
 
14.11
 “Conversely, a person who has turned away from Bhagvãn,  does  not 
attain kalyãn when   he   leaves   his   physical   body,   even   if   he   is 
conscious.    Instead,  he  is  sent  to Yampuri after  death.    There  are 
many sinful butchers who die while still fully conscious and aware of 
their  body.    Will  they  attain kalyãn?    Of  course  not.    If  a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn suffers   an   accidental   death   and   does   not   remember 
Bhagvãn, he will still attain kalyãn. 
 
14.12
 “Therefore, that Vedic shlok should  be  interpreted  as  follows: ‘The 
outcome  at  the  time  of  death  is  determined  by  the  present  state  of 
mind’.    Therefore,  a bhakta who  realises  in  his  mind ‘My kalyãn is 
guaranteed’ will  as  a  result  certainly  attain kalyãn after  death.    In 
comparison, a person who has not been graced with the company of 
a sant or  the svarup of Bhagvãn,  will  feel  in  his  mind ‘I am ignorant, 
and  I  will not attain kalyãn’.    As  a  result,  his  state  of  mind  will 
determine his fate after death.  
 
14.13
 “A person who is the dãs of Bhagvãn has  nothing  left  to  do.    In  fact, 
other jeevs attain kalyãn by  his darshan,  so  what  is  surprising  about 
him  attaining kalyãn?    But  to  develop  servitude  towards Bhagvãn is 
very  difficult  indeed.    This  is  because  a dãs of Bhagvãn has  the 
following characteristics: he realises the physical body as asatya, and 
his  own ãtmã as satya.    He  has  no  desires  to  indulge  in  objects  that 
are  intended  for  his  master.    Also,  he  never  behaves  against  the 
wishes  of  his  master.    Such  a  person  is  called  a  true dãs of Bhagvãn.  
However,  a dãs of Bhagvãn who  behaves  as  the  body,  is  a  false 
bhakta.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 14 || 14 || 

GADHADÃ I 
- 45 - 
Gadhadã I – 15 
Not Becoming Discouraged In Dhyãn 
 
15.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on Mãgshar  vad 3  [4
th
 December,  1819], 
Shreeji Mahãrãj was sitting in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He 
was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
15.2
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “A person whose heart is filled with bhakti 
towards Bhagvãn,  feels ‘I only want to act according to the ãgnã of 
Bhagvãn and His sant’.    This  is  the  spirit  within  his  heart.    Also,  he 
never – not  even  by  mistake – utters ‘I will only be able to follow 
certain ãgnã, but not others’. 
 
15.3
 “Furthermore,  such  a  person  remains  determined  to  see  the 
Bhagvãn’s murti in  his  heart.    If,  while  performing dhyãn on  that 
murti,  it  cannot  be  seen,  he  does  not  lose  courage.    Instead,  he 
constantly maintains a new shraddhã.  While trying to see that murti, 
disturbing thoughts may arise, and despite his best efforts, they may 
not  be  suppressed.    However,  these  disturbing  thoughts  can be 
overcome.    The murti of Bhagvãn can  then  be  seen  within  the  heart 
by  understanding  the  immense  glory  of Bhagvãn and  by  believing 
himself  to  be  completely  fulfilled.    Even  if  this  process  takes  ten 
years,  twenty  years,  twenty-five  years,  or  even  a  hundred  years,  he 
still does not become discouraged.  He never abandon’s his attempts 
at  seeing  the murti of Bhagvãn within  his  heart.    After  all, Shree 
Krishna Bhagvãn has mentioned in the Geetã: 
 
anek-janma-sansiddh-stato yãti parãm gatim 
A yogi who has become siddh after many lives, attains Akshardhãm. 
 
15.4
 “Therefore, a person who continues to try and see Bhagvãn in  this 
way, is called an ekãntik bhakta.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 15 || 15 || 

GADHADÃ I 
- 46 - 
Gadhadã I – 16 
Wisdom 
 
16.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on Mãgshar  vad 4  [5
th
 December,  1819], 
Shreeji Mahãrãj was sitting in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He 
was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of sãdhus, as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
16.2
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj said, “A wise bhakta of Bhagvãn,  who  can 
distinguish between sat and asat, perceives the avgun within himself 
and  thoughtfully  eradicates  them.    He  also  rejects  any  apparent 
avgun he  perceives  in  a sant or  a satsangi,  and  perceives  their gun.  
Moreover, he never sees avgun in Bhagvãn.  In addition, he accepts as 
the highest truth, whatever words of advice Bhagvãn and a sant offer 
and  does  not  doubt  their words in  any  way.    Therefore,  when  a sant 
tells him ‘You are distinct from the mind, body, indriyas, and prãns; you 
are  satya;  you  are  the  knower  of  the  body,  indriyas,  and  prãns,  which 
are all asatya’ he accepts this to be the truth.  He then behaves as the 
ãtmã – distinct from them all – and never follows the instincts of his 
own mind. 
 
16.3
 “In addition,  such  a  person  perceives  objects  and kusang that  may 
cause  bondage,  or  raise  deficiencies  in  the ekãntik dharma,  and 
avoids  them.    He does  not  become  bound  by  them.    Also,  he  takes  in 
thoughts  that  are  positive,  and  avoids  thoughts  that  are  negative.   A 
person, who behaves in this way, is known to possess wisdom.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 16 || 16 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 17 
Negative Influence In Satsang 
Never Speak Discouraging Words 
 
17.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on Mãgshar  vad 5  [6
th
 December,  1819], 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  in  a  west-facing room of Dãdã Khãchar’s 

GADHADÃ I 
- 47 - 
darbãr in Gadhadã, while the kathã was being read.  He was wearing 
a  white khes,  and  had  covered  Himself  with  a chãdar.    He  had  tied  a 
white pãgh around His head, with a tassel of yellow flowers inserted 
into  the pãgh,  and  He  was  wearing  a  garland  of  yellow  flowers.    He 
was in a very pleasant mood. 
 
17.2
 At    that    time,    Shreeji    Mahãrãj    called    for    Muktãnand    Swãmi, 
Gopãlãnand Swãmi and some other sãdhus.  Addressing them, Shreeji 
Mahãrãj said, “A small element of negative influence still remains in 
our satsang,  which  I  wish  to  eliminate  today.    I  want  to  conduct  this 
matter in a way that includes all satsangis, paramhans, sãnkhya-yogis, 
and karma-yogis. 
 
17.3
 “Now, what is this negative influence in satsang?  Well, it is those who 
speak discouragingly about satsang.  That is the negative influence in 
satsang.    What  do  they  say?    They  say, ‘Who can follow Bhagvãn’s 
ãgnã thoroughly?  Who can possibly follow the vartmãns perfectly?  No 
one.    Therefore,  we  should  follow  only  as  much  as  we  can.    After  all, 
Bhagvãn is adham-udhãran, and so He will grant kalyãn to us as well’. 
 
17.4
 “They also say, ‘Attempting to see Bhagvãn’s svarup in the heart is not 
possible by a person’s own efforts.  It is only seen by those whom 
Bhagvãn helps out of compassion’.    With  such  proud  words,  they 
discourage  others  from  practicing dharma, gnãn, vairãgya, bhakti, 
and other spiritual activities that please Bhagvãn. 
 
17.5
 “Therefore, from this day onwards, no one in our satsang should ever 
utter  such  discouraging  words.    Instead,  always  speak  with  courage.  
Those  who  do  speak  such  words  should  be  known  as napunsak.    In 
fact,  on  days  when  a  person  speaks  such  discouraging  words,  he 
should keep an upvãs.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 17 || 17 || 
 

GADHADÃ I 
- 48 - 
Gadhadã I – 18 
Denouncing The Panch-Vishays 
 
18.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on Mãgshar  vad 6  [7
th
 December  1819], 
three  hours  before  sunrise,  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was 
sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead,  in  the  courtyard  in  front  of  the 
veranda  outside  the  west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Gadhadã.  He was dressed entirely in white clothes. 
 
18.2
 After   calling   the paramhans and satsangis,   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   sat 
engrossed in thought for quite some time.  Then, He said, “I wish to 
tell all of you something, so please listen.”  He then said, “In my mind 
I  feel  that  I  should  not  talk  about this  matter.    However,  I  have  the 
understanding that you are all mine, so I shall tell you.  The matter is 
such   that   only   a   person   who   understands   it   and   acts   exactly 
according to it, will become a mukta.  Otherwise, even by listening to 
or  studying  and  understanding  the  meanings  of  the  four  Veds,  six 
shãstras,  eighteen  Purãns,  and  the  Mahãbhãrat  and  other  historical 
shãstras, a person cannot become a mukta.  I shall now talk about the 
matter, so please listen.  
 
18.3
 “Regardless of the attractive objects which may  appear  before me, if 
there  is  no  desire  for  them  in  my  mind,  I  am  not  worried.    Also,  my 
nature  is  such  that  even  if  the  slightest  desire  of  an  object  were  to 
arise within me, I only feel at ease after shunning it. 
 
18.4
 “For this reason, I thought  about  what  actually  causes  disturbances 
within the hearts of Bhagvãn’s bhaktas.  I considered the man, buddhi, 
chitt, and ahankãr as possible causes.  However, the antah-karans are 
not  the  cause  of  these  disturbances.    The  only  fault  of  the antah-
karans is  the  satisfaction  that  it  has,  due  to  either  the  power  of  its 
nishchay in Bhagvãn or  the  strength  derived  from  knowledge  of  the 
ãtmã.  Due to this satisfaction, it feels, ‘I have found Bhagvãn, and so I 
have nothing left to do’. 

GADHADÃ I 
- 49 - 
18.5
 “Actually, the greater  fault  lies  with  the  five gnãn-indriyas,  which  I 
shall  now  elaborate  in  detail.    Of  the  many  varieties  of  foods  that  a 
person  eats,  each  has  differing  tastes  and  differing  natural  qualities.  
When he eats that food, the natural qualities of the food pervade and 
affect the antah-karans as well as the entire body.  For example, even 
a bhakta of Bhagvãn,  after  drinking bhãng,  loses  awareness  of  his 
vartmãns and the worship of Bhagvãn, due to the stimulation caused 
by  that bhãng.    Similarly, the  natural  qualities  of  the  countless  types 
of  food  are  of  a  countless  variety,  like bhãng.    So  much  so,  that  they 
seem endless. 
 
18.6
 “In the same way, a person also hears a countless variety of sounds 
with  his  ears.   Those  sounds  also  have  a countless  variety  of  natural 
qualities.    Consequently,  the  qualities  of  whatever  sounds  he  listens 
to,  pervade  and  affect  his antah-karans.    For  example,  there  may  be 
an armed and violent person, an adulterous person, a prostitute, or a 
person  who  disobeys  the  rules  of  the  Veds  and  society.    Listening  to 
the  talks  of  such  vicious  persons  is  like  drinking bhãng or  alcohol – 
such  talks  pollute  the antah-karans of  the  listener  and  make  him 
forget the worship of Bhagvãn and His vartmãns. 
 
18.7
 “Similarly, there are countless varieties of touch sensations.  They too 
have  countless  varieties  of  natural  qualities.    The  touch  of  a  sinful 
person  also  has  an  effect  like  that  of bhãng and  alcohol.    Therefore, 
even if a bhakta touched such a person, that bhakta will lose all of his 
gun. 
 
18.8
 “There are also countless varieties of things to see.  They too have 
countless  varieties  of  natural  qualities.    If  a  person  looks  at  an 
immoral  person,  the  effect  is  just  as  damaging  as  drinking bhãng or 
alcohol.    Therefore,  looking  at  an  immoral  person definitely  pollutes 
his mind and causes harm. 
 
18.9
 “In  the  same  way,  there  are  countless  varieties  of  smells,  with 
countless   varieties   of   natural   qualities.      If   a   person   smells   the 

GADHADÃ I 
- 50 - 
fragrance of a flower or some sandalwood paste from the hands of a 
sinful person, it pollutes his mind in the same way as drinking bhãng. 
 
18.10
 “Conversely, just as the mind is polluted by association with an 
immoral person, association of Bhagvãn or His sant purifies the mind.  
Even if the mind is polluted, it is purified by listening to the words of 
Bhagvãn and His sant.  The mind is similarly purified by their touch.  
However,  if  a  person  is  unable  to  touch  such  a  great sant due  to  the 
restrictions of his vartmãns, then merely touching the dust of his holy 
feet to his head makes him pure.  Likewise, a person is purified by the 
darshan of  a  great sant.    However,  he  should  have darshan while 
respecting  his vartmãns.    A  person  is  also  purified  by  eating prasãd, 
but  the prasãd should  be taken in  accordance  with  the niyams of  his 
varna and ãshram as  set  by Bhagvãn.    If  a  person  is  unable  to  take 
prasãd,  he  should  offer sãkar and  take  that  as prasãd.    In  the  same 
way,  smelling  the  fragrance  of  the  flowers  and  sandalwood  paste 
offered to the great sant also purifies the mind. 
 
18.11
 “On  the  other  hand,  if  a  person  indulges  in  the  five vishays 
thoughtlessly,  without  distinguishing  good  from  bad,  then  even  if  he 
is  great  as Nãrad and  the Sanakãdik,  his  mind  will  surely  become 
polluted.    What  is  so  surprising  about  the  mind  of  a  person  who 
believes  himself  to  be  the  body  becoming  polluted?    Therefore,  if  he 
gives   freedom   to   the   five indriyas without   understanding   the 
difference  between  suitable  and unsuitable,  his antah-karans will 
become polluted.  On the other hand, if a person indulges only in pure 
vishays through the five indriyas, then his antah-karans become pure.  
If   the antah-karans become   pure,   he   will   be   able   to   constantly 
remember Bhagvãn. 
 
18.12
 “However, if the objects of indulgence of even just one of the five 
indriyas are   impure,   the antah-karans will   also   become   impure.  
Therefore, the sole cause of any disturbance experienced by a bhakta 
of Bhagvãn during worship is the vishays of the five indriyas, not the 
antah-karan.   

GADHADÃ I 
- 51 - 
18.13
 “Another factor  that  determines  the  nature  of a  person’s antah-
karans is  the  type  of  company  he  keeps.    If  he  sits  in  a sabhã of 
materialistic people in a lavish seven-storey mansion decorated with 
beautiful  mirrors  and  comfortable  seats,  and  if  those  materialistic 
people are seated wearing various types of jewellery and fine clothes, 
and    they    are    exchanging    alcohol    amongst    themselves,    with 
prostitutes   performing   vulgar   dances   to   the   accompaniment   of 
various  musical  instruments – then the person’s antah-karans will 
unquestionably be harmfully affected.  On the other hand, if a person 
sits  in  a sabhã where  a paramhans is  seated  on  a  torn  mattress  in  a 
grass  hut  and  talks  of Bhagvãn, dharma, gnãn, vairãgya and bhakti 
are  in  progress – then the  person’s antah-karans will  surely  be 
favourably affected. 
 
18.14
 “Therefore, if a person thoughtfully examines the influence of satsang 
and kusang on   the antah-karans,   their   effects   can   be   realised.  
However,  a  fool  cannot  realise  this.    Indeed,  this  fact  will  not  be 
understood  by  those  who  behave  irresponsibly  like  animals.    In 
comparison, a person who has even a little wisdom and has sought at 
least    some    refuge    in Bhagvãn will    immediately    understand.  
Therefore,  all paramhans, sãnkhya-yogis and karma-yogis should  not 
associate with evil people. 
 
18.15
 “Regardless of how evil a person may be before joining the satsang, 
he  should  be  accepted  into satsang after  he  takes  the  appropriate 
niyams.  However, if after joining the satsang, that person retains his 
evil nature, he or she should be removed from satsang.  If he or she is 
not removed, then great harm will result.  For example, if a person’s 
finger  is  bitten  by  a  snake,  or  if  it  develops  gangrene,  and  if  the 
affected  part  is  not  immediately  removed,  the  results  would  be 
damaging.    Similarly,  if  a  person  is  recognised  as  evil,  you  should 
immediately shun him. 
 
18.16
 “In conclusion, remain wise enough to accept these words of mine.  If 
you do so, I shall consider it to be equivalent to you having served me 

GADHADÃ I 
- 52 - 
in  every  way.    I  will  also  bless  all  of  you  and  be  extremely  pleased 
with   you.      This   is   because   you   will   have   justified   my   efforts.  
Moreover,   all  of   us   will   stay   together   in   the dhãm   of   Bhagvãn.  
However,  if  you  do  not  behave  in  this  way,  we  will  be  greatly 
distanced.  Consequently, you will reborn as a ghost or a demon, and 
you  will  have  to  suffer.    Of  course,  the  fruits  of  whatever bhakti you 
may have previously offered to Bhagvãn will be rewarded eventually, 
but only after great misery.  Even then, you will become a mukta and 
go to Akshardhãm only by behaving as I have described.   
 
18.17
 “Furthermore, if anyone attempts to imitate me, he will definitely 
suffer.      This   is   because Nar-Nãrãyan resides   within   my   heart.  
Moreover, I am an eternal mukta.  I have not become a mukta through 
the  preaching  of  others.    I  exercise  complete  control  over  my man, 
buddhi, chitt,  and ahankãr.    In  fact,  I  seize  my antah-karans just  as  a 
lion  clutches  a  goat,  whereas  others  cannot  even  see  their antah-
karans.    Therefore,  imitating  me,  and  believing  that  a  person  can 
remain  pure  even  amidst  attractive  pleasures  is  just  not  possible, 
even for the likes of Nãrad and the Sanakãdik.  So what can be said of 
others? 
 
18.18
 “A countless number have become muktas,  and  countless  more  will 
become muktas.    Amongst  them,  none  have  been  able  to  indulge  in 
pleasures  of  the  senses  and  yet  remain  uninfluenced  by  them;  none 
will  be  able  to  do  so  in  the  future;  nor  is  there  anyone  like  that 
presently.    Even  a person who  has  made  an  effort  for  countless 
millions   of   years  is  incapable   of   remaining   uninfluenced   amidst 
temptations.    Therefore,  if  you  behave  as  I  have  described,  you  will 
benefit.” 
 
18.19
 Continuing, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “When I lovingly call someone near, 
it is for the benefit of their jeev.  When I look at someone lovingly, or 
eat   the   tasty   meals   they   have   prepared,   or   sit   on   a   decorated 
bedstead, or accept clothes, jewellery, garlands of flowers, and other 
offerings – it  is  all  for  the  good  of  their   jeev,  but  not  for  the  sake  of 

GADHADÃ I 
- 53 - 
my personal enjoyment.  In fact, I vow on Rãmãnand Swãmi that I do 
not   accept   those   objects   for   my   personal   pleasure.      Therefore, 
realising this, none of you should imitate me.  
 
18.20
 “Also, keep the activities of your five indriyas extremely pure.  Please 
accept  this ãgnã of mine without  fail.   This  fact is simple in  that it  is 
comprehensible  to  all;  so  all  of  you  will  immediately  understand  it.  
Moreover,  if  you  extensively  announce  it  throughout satsang,  I  shall 
be very pleased indeed.” 
 
18.21
 Having delivered this talk, Shreeji Mahãrãj bid “Jay Sachidãnand” to 
all and returned to His residence. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 18 || 18 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 19 
Ãtmã-Nishthã, Bhakti, Vairãgya, And Svadharma 
 
19.1
 In   the Samvat year   1876,   on   the   evening   of Posh sud 1   [18
th
 
December,  1819], Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was sitting  in  Dãdã  Khãchar’s 
darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A 
sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as  and haribhaktas from  various  places, 
had gathered before Him. 
 
19.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “In this satsang,  those bhaktas who  seek 
their  own ãtyantik  kalyãn cannot  fulfil  that  aim  by ãtmã-nishthã 
alone; nor can they fulfil that aim by lovingly offering the nine types 
of bhakti alone; nor can they fulfil that aim by vairãgya alone; nor can 
they fulfil that aim by svadharma alone.  Therefore, all four qualties – 
ãtmã-nishthã, bhakti, vairãgya, and svadharma – should be perfected 
since  all  are  dependent  upon  each  other.    Now,  please  listen  as  I 
describe how these four qualities are interdependent. 
 
19.3
 “If  a  person  has ãtmã-nishthã,   but   does   not   have   love   towards 
Bhagvãn,  then  he  does  not  attain  the  compassion  of Bhagvãn,  which 
can   only   be   attained   by   love.      Such   compassion   results   in   the 

GADHADÃ I 
- 54 - 
achievement  of  the  desirable  and  great  divine  power  of  not  being 
overpowered by the gun of Mãyã.  On the other hand, if a person does 
have love for Bhagvãn, but has not attained ãtmã-nishthã, then due to 
the  belief  that  he  is  the  body,  that  love  cannot  be  perfected.    Also,  a 
person  may  have  both ãtmã-nishthã and  love  for Bhagvãn,  but  if  he 
lacks  firm vairãgya,  then  the  desires  for  worldly five vishays will 
prevent the perfection of ãtmã-nishthã and love for Bhagvãn.  
 
19.4
 “Then again, a person may have vairãgya, but if he lacks ãtmã-nishthã 
and  love  for Bhagvãn,  he  does  not  experience  the  profound  bliss 
associated  with  the svarup of Bhagvãn.    Also,  a  person  may  have 
svadharma,  but  if  love  for Bhagvãn, ãtmã-nishthã and vairãgya are 
absent,  then  he  will  not  be  able  to  rise  above  Bhur-Lok,  Bhuvar-Lok, 
and all the other loks up to Brahmã’s Svarg-Lok.  That is to say, he will 
not   be   able   to   rise   above   the brahmãnds and   attain Bhagvãn’s 
Akshardhãm,  which  is  greater  than  the  darkness  of Mãyã.    On  the 
other  hand,  a  person  may  have  the  three  qualities  of ãtmã-nishthã, 
love for Bhagvãn, and vairãgya; but if svadharma is lacking, the three 
cannot be perfected. 
 
19.5
 “In this way, ãtmã-nishthã and  other  three  qualities  are  dependent 
upon  each  other.    A bhakta, who  has  extremely  firmly  established 
these  four  qualities  within  himself  through  the  profound association 
with Bhagvãn’s ekãntik bhaktas, has completed all spiritual activities.  
Only  he  should  be  known  as  an ekãntik bhakta.    Therefore,  a bhakta 
having  any  deficiency  in  these  four  qualities  should  overcome  that 
deficiency  by  serving  and  profoundly  associating  with  the ekãntik 
bhakta of Bhagvãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 19 || 19 || 
 
Gadhadã I – 20 
An Ignorant Person Does Not See His Own Svarup 
 
20.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on Posh sud 2  [19
th
 December,  1819], 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  seated  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on  the  veranda 

GADHADÃ I 
- 55 - 
outside  the  east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.  
He  had  tied  a  white pãgh around  His  head,  and  a  tassel  of  yellow 
flowers had been placed in the pãgh.  A garland of yellow flowers had 
been  placed  around  His  neck,  and  bunches  of  white  and  yellow 
flowers had been placed above His ears.  He had also covered Himself 
with a white chofãl and was wearing a khes with a black border.  The 
kathã was being read.  A sabhã of paramhans, as well as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
20.2
 Then,  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj said, “Please listen, I wish 
to ask all of you a question.” 
 
20.3
 Hearing  this,  all  the haribhaktas said with folded hands, “Please do 
ask.” 
 
20.4
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then asked, “Who is the most ignorant of all ignorant 
people?” 
 
20.5
 Everyone  pondered  over the  question,  but  no  one  was  able  to  reply.  
So, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Here, I shall answer myself.” 
 
20.6
 Hearing this, everyone was pleased and said, “Mahãrãj, only you will 
be able to give a precise answer, so please explain.” 
 
20.7
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then began, “The jeev, which resides within the body, 
observes   both   the   attractive   and   the   unattractive.      It   witnesses 
childhood, youth, and old age, as well as a countless number of other 
things.  However, the observer (jeev) fails to observe its own svarup.  
The jeev looks  at  objects  externally,  but  it  does  not  look  at  its  own 
svarup.  Therefore, it is the most ignorant of the ignorant. 
    
20.8
 “Furthermore, just as the jeev indulges in a countless variety of sights 
with the eyes, it similarly indulges in and knows the pleasures of the 
other vishays with the ears, skin, tongue, and nose.  However, it does 
not  indulge  in  the  bliss  of  its  own svarup and  nor  does  it  know  its 
own  nature.    For  this  reason,  it  is  the  most  ignorant  of  the  ignorant, 

GADHADÃ I 
- 56 - 
the most senseless of the senseless, the most foolish of fools, and the 
vilest of the vile.” 
 
20.9
 At  that point, Shuk Muni raised a doubt.  He asked, “Is it truly in a 
person’s own hands to see his own svarup?  If it is, why does the jeev 
remain ignorant?” 
 
20.10
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “For a person who has attained satsang, 
darshan of  his jeevãtmã lies  in  his  own  hands.    In  fact,  when  has  he 
attempted to see his own svarup and failed to see it?  Having become 
dependent  on  and  made  helpless  by mãyã,  that jeev draws  within, 
and  enters  the svapna and sushupti states,  but  never  does  it  draw 
within of its own accord to see its own svarup.  On the other hand, a 
person who thinks about the greatness of Bhagvãn and draws within 
himself sees his own svarup as extremely pure and luminous.  In the 
midst   of   the   luminance,   he   beholds   the murti of Purushottam 
Bhagvãn,   and   experiences   bliss   in   the   way   of Nãrad and   the 
Sanakãdik.  Therefore, all deficiencies in a bhakta are due to his own 
laziness.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 20 || 20 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 21 
Svadharma 
The Two Forms Of Akshar 
 
21.1
 In   the Samvat year   1876,   on   the   evening   of Posh sud 3   [19
th
 
December,   1819],   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  east-facing  rooms  of  Dãdã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  wearing  a khes with  a  black 
border,  and  had  covered  Himself  with  a  white cotton  cloth.    He  had 
also tied a white pãgh around His head.  A sabhã of sãdhus, as well as 
haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered  before  Him.    Some  of 
the sãdhus were singing kirtans to the accompaniment of a jhãnjh and 
pakhvãj. 

GADHADÃ I 
- 57 - 
21.2
 Shreeji Mahãrãj quietened the sabhã and said, “Please listen, I wish to 
tell you something.”  Having said this, He sat in deep thought with His 
eyes closed for quite some time. 
 
21.3
 Then, He said, “A haribhakta,  who  in  his  mind  desires  to  intensely 
please Bhagvãn,  can do  so  by  the  following  means:  unshakeable 
determination  in  abiding  by  the dharma of  his varna and ãshram; 
firm ãtmã-nishthã;  dislike  for  all  objects  except Bhagvãn;  and bhakti 
which is without any desires for rewards, and which is accompanied 
with an understanding of Bhagvãn’s greatness.  Bhagvãn is extremely 
pleased  by  these  four  spiritual  activities.    These  spiritual  activities 
are  collectively  known  as ekãntik dharma.    At  present,  there  are 
many bhaktas in our satsang, who possess ekãntik dharma. 
 
21.4
 “A bhakta of Bhagvãn should  think  of  the murti of Bhagvãn while 
eating,  drinking,  bathing,  washing,  walking,  sitting,  and  all  other 
activities.  He should particularly think of Bhagvãn and continuously 
think  of  His murti when  there  is  no  mental  disturbance within.  
However,  when  there  is  some  internal  disturbance  due  to  random 
thoughts, he should realise his own self to be distinct from the body, 
the indriyas,  the antah-karans,  and  the vishays, and their  presiding 
devs.  Only when those disturbing thoughts diminish, should he think 
of the murti of Bhagvãn. 
 
21.5
 “The body should not be believed to be a person’s true self, nor 
should a person’s bodily relations be regarded as his true relations.  
This  is  because  the jeev has  previously  taken  birth in  each  of  the  8.4 
million life-forms.  In fact, the jeev has taken birth in the wombs of all 
females  in  this  world;  it  has  also  taken  birth  numerous  times  in  the 
wombs of all the dogs, cats, monkeys, and other types of life-forms in 
the  cycle  of  8.4  million  life-forms.    Also,  of  all  the  different  types  of 
females in this world, which has it not previously made its wife?  All 
have been its wife at one time or another.  Similarly, with numerous 
female  bodies,  that jeev has  also  made  all  the  different  forms  of 
males, its husband. 

GADHADÃ I 
- 58 - 
21.6
 “Therefore, just as a person does not believe the relations of those 
previous 8.4 million life-forms to be his true relations, and just as he 
does  not  believe  the  bodies  of  those  8.4  million  to  be  his true 
relations,  and  just  as  he  does  not  believe  the  bodies  of  those  8.4 
million  life-forms  to  be  his  true  body,  in  the  same  way,  a  person 
should not believe this present body to be his true self, nor should he 
believe the relations of this body to be his true relations. 
 
21.7
 “Therefore, a person should offer bhakti to Bhagvãn day  by  day,  and 
should also constantly keep the company of a sãdhu, while regarding 
all   possessions   and   all   objects   as asatya,   while   having   realised 
himself  to  be  distinct  from  the  body, indriyas, and antah-karans,  and 
while following his own dharma. 
 
21.8
 “A person who does not have this understanding – who  identifies 
himself with the body, and who has an ordinary attitude – should be 
thought of as an animal, even if he is presently in satsang.  Yet, in this 
satsang,  even  animals  attain kalyãn by  the  intense grace of Bhagvãn.  
So, what is so special about humans attaining kalyãn?  However, such 
a  person  cannot  be  called  a  true ekãntik  bhakta of Bhagvãn.    Only  a 
person  possessing  the  understanding  previously  described  can  be 
called  an ekãntik bhakta.    After  such  an ekãntik  bhakta leaves  his 
body   and   becomes   free   of   all   influences   of mãyã,   he   attains 
Akshardhãm via the archimãrg. 
 
21.9
 “Akshar has two forms.  One, which is formless and pure chaitanya, is 
known  as Chidãkãsh or Brahm-Mahol.    In  its  other  form, Akshar 
remains  in  the sevã of Purushottam-Nãrãyan.    A bhakta who  has 
reached Akshardhãm attains qualities similar to those of Akshar, and 
forever remains in the sevã of Bhagvãn.  Furthermore, Shree Krishna 
Purushottam-Nãrãyan is  forever  seated  in  that Akshardhãm.    The 
countless millions of muktas, who have attained Akshardhãm, behave 
as the dãs of Bhagvãn.  Purushottam-Nãrãyan Himself is the master of 
them  all,  and  the  master  of the  kings  of  all  the  countless  millions  of 
brahmãnds.  

GADHADÃ I 
- 59 - 
 
21.10
 “Keeping  this  in  mind,  all  of  our satsangis should   develop   the 
following  singular  belief:   ‘We also wish to sit beside the akshar-rup 
muktas,  and  we  wish  to  go  to  Akshardhãm,  and  forever  remain in  the 
sevã  of  Bhagvãn.    We  have  no  desire  for  the  temporary  and  mãyik 
worldly  pleasures,  and  nor  do  we  wish  to  be  tempted  by  them  in  any 
way’.  Keeping such a firm belief, a person should offer ekãntik bhakti 
to Bhagvãn. 
 
21.11
 “By thoroughly understanding  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn,  a  person 
should eradicate his desires for women, wealth, and all objects other 
than Bhagvãn.    If  desires  for  objects  other  than Bhagvãn are  to 
remain,  then  if  on  the  path  to Akshardhãm he  is  tempted  by  these 
objects,  he  will  abandon Bhagvãn and  be  lured  by  those  objects 
instead.    This  would  prove  to  be  a  major  disaster.    Therefore,  a 
person  should  worship Bhagvãn after  overcoming  desires  for  all 
objects.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 21 || 21 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 22 
Remember Bhagvãn During All Activities 
 
22.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  at  noon  on Posh sud 4  [20
th
 December, 
1819],  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  seated  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on  the 
veranda  outside  the  east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A  tassel  of 
flowers  had  been  inserted  in  His pãgh,  and  bunches  of  flowers  had 
been placed above both of His ears.  He was also wearing a garland of 
guldãvadi flowers around His neck.  A sabhã of paramhans, as well as 
haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered  before  Him.    The 
paramhans were singing kirtans. 
 
22.2
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  said,  “Please  listen.    I  wish  to  tell  you 
something.” 

GADHADÃ I 
- 60 - 
 
22.3
 Hearing    this,    the paramhans stopped    singing    and    prepared 
themselves to listen. 
 
22.4
 Shreeji Mahãrãj continued, “If a person does not remember Bhagvãn 
while  singing kirtans to  the  accompaniment of a mrudang,  a sãrangi, 
a sarodã, and other musical instruments, then that singing is as good 
as  not  having  sung  at  all.    There  are  many  people  in the  world  who 
sing  and  play  instruments  without  remembering Bhagvãn,  but  they 
do  not  attain  peace  of  mind.    Therefore,  whichever  activity  a  person 
performs – whether it is singing kirtans, reciting Bhagvãn’s name, or 
singing  the Nãrãyan dhun, – he  should  only  perform  that  activity 
while remembering the murti of Bhagvãn. 
 
22.5
 “If a person specifically attempts to engage himself in bhajan, he may 
only   be   able   to   focus   his vrutti on   Bhagvãn.      However,   after 
completing those acts of bhajan if he does not keep vrutti in Bhagvãn 
while  performing  daily  duties,  his vrutti will  not  be  steady  on  the 
murti of Bhagvãn even  if  he  attempts  to  engage  in bhajan again.  
Therefore,  a  person  should  practice  maintaining  his vrutti on  the 
svarup of Bhagvãn while  walking,  eating,  and  drinking – in  fact, 
during  all  activities.    If  he  does  this,  his vrutti becomes  fixed  on 
Bhagvãn when  he  engages  in bhajan as  well.    Moreover,  when  his 
vrutti begins  to  remain  on Bhagvãn,  it  remains  so even  during  other 
work.    If  a  person  is  stupid  and  ignorant,  then  he  will  not  be  able  to 
keep vrutti in Bhagvãn,  even  when  he  does bhajan.    Therefore,  a 
bhakta of Bhagvãn should carefully practice maintaining his vrutti on 
the murti of Bhagvãn.” 
 
22.6
 Having  said  this,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  requested,  “Now  please   sing 
kirtans.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 22 || 22 || 
 
 

GADHADÃ I 
- 61 - 
Gadhadã I – 23 
The Nature Of A Bhakta With Strong Sthiti 
 
23.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on Posh sud 5  [21
st
 December,  1819], 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on  the  veranda 
outside  the  east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.  
He  had  tied  a  white feto around  His  head  and  was  wearing  a  white 
angarkhu and  white survãl.    He  had  also  tied  a  deep  orange shelu 
around  His  waist.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as satsangis from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
23.2
 Out  of  compassion,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  began  to  speak  to  the 
paramhans, “The Vãsudev Mahãtmya shãstra is extremely dear to me, 
as  it  describes  all  the  methods  of  how bhaktas of Bhagvãn should 
worship Him.” 
 
23.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then continued, “There are two types of bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn:   One bhakta has   complete nishchay in Bhagvãn,   yet 
worships Bhagvãn identifying  himself  with  the  body.    The  other, 
believes his own svarup to be chaitanya, and beyond the influence of 
the   three  mental  states   (jãgrat, svapna, sushupti)   and   the   three 
bodies  (sthul, sukshma,  and kãran).    This bhakta worships Bhagvãn 
while  seeing Bhagvãn’s murti within  his  own svarup.    As  a  result,  he 
sees his own svarup, which is beyond the three mental states and the 
three bodies, as being extremely full of divine light.  Within that light, 
he sees the murti of Bhagvãn, just as it is in its pratyaksha svarup, as 
being extremely luminous.  Such is the sthiti of this bhakta. 
 
23.4
 “As long as a person has not attained this sthiti,  he  is  subject  to 
obstacles,  even  if  he  is  a bhakta of Bhagvãn.    For  example, Shivji did 
not have this sthiti and was therefore enticed by the beauty of Mohini.  
Brahmã also  did  not  have  this sthiti,  and  therefore became  attracted 
to  the svarup of Sarasvati.   Nãradji also  did  not  have  such sthiti,  and 
consequently  had  a  desire  to  marry.    Others  like Indra and Chandra, 

GADHADÃ I 
- 62 - 
who  were  not  behaving  with  this sthiti,  also  had  their  reputations 
blemished due to their mistakes. 
 
23.5
 “Furthermore,  if  a  person  has  not  developed  this sthiti,   he   will 
identify worldly characteristics even in Bhagvãn, even if he himself is 
a bhakta of Bhagvãn.  Parikshit Rãjã was not such a bhakta who had 
this sthiti, and so he raised doubts about the divinity of Shree Krishna 
Bhagvãn after  hearing  of  the rãs-leelã.    On  the  other  hand,  because 
Shukji  was  such  an  elevated bhakta,  he  had  no  doubts  whatsoever.  
Such  a bhakta firmly  realises ‘If no flaws can affect me or bind me in 
any  way,  how  can  there  possibly  be  any  mãyik  flaws  in  Bhagvãn,  by 
whose worship I have become like this?’  A bhakta with  this sthiti 
firmly realises this. 
 
23.6
 “When such a bhakta of Bhagvãn focuses  his vrutti on  the svarup of 
Bhagvãn,  that vrutti is  divided  into  two.    Of  these,  one vrutti focuses 
on   the svarup of Bhagvãn,   while   the   other   focuses   within   the 
worshipper  himself.    The vrutti that  is  fixed  on Bhagvãn’s svarup is 
applied  lovingly,  whereas  the vrutti that  is  fixed  on  the  worshipper 
himself   is   full   of   thoughts.      This vrutti that   is   full   of   thoughts 
neutralises   all   other   thoughts   and   desires – except   those   of 
worshipping Bhagvãn – that may arise in the worshipper himself.  In 
this way, the vrutti of such a bhakta constantly remains on Bhagvãn. 
 
23.7
 “A person who at times worships Bhagvãn with a concentrated mind, 
and  at  other  times  indulges  in  worldly  thoughts,  does  not  develop 
this sthiti.    For  example,  consider a  pot  that  is  filled  with  water  and 
emptied   somewhere.      If   another   pot   of   water   is   subsequently 
emptied at the same place on the following day or the day after that, 
a  pool  of  water  will  not  collect  there.    This  is  because  the  water 
poured on the first day dried up on that very day, and water poured 
after also dries up on that same day.  On the other hand, if a trickle of 
water  were  to  flow  continuously,  a  large  pool  of  water  will  soon  be 
formed.    Therefore,  while  eating,  drinking,  walking,  and  engaging  in 

GADHADÃ I 
- 63 - 
any activity whatsoever – whether it is pure or impure – in fact, at all 
times,  a  person  should  constantly  keep  his vrutti of Bhagvãn.    While 
maintaining  his vrutti constantly  on Bhagvãn in  this  way,  he  attains 
strong sthiti.” 
  
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 23 || 23 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 24 
Sthiti Attained By Gnãn 
The ‘Sourness’ Of Bhagvãn’s Greatness 
 
24.1
 In   the Samvat year   1876,   on   the   evening   of Posh sud 6   [22
nd
 
December,   1819],   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside the  east-facing  rooms  of  Dãdã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  had  tied  a  white feto around  His 
head, and was wearing a white khes.  Also, He had put on a warm, red 
dagli and  had  covered  Himself  with  a  white chofãl.    A sabhã of 
paramhans,  as  well  as satsangis from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before Him. 
 
24.2
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said  to  the paramhans, “I shall explain how 
sthiti can  be  attained  by gnãn.    What  is  this gnãn like?    Well,  it  is 
greater  than Prakruti and Purush.    When sthiti is  attained  by  this 
gnãn, Prakruti-Purush and their actions do not come into view.  This 
is known as gnãn-pralay.  A person, who has attained this sthiti, sees 
only pure chaitanya, within which only the murti of Bhagvãn resides, 
with  no  other  forms  remaining.    At  times,  a  person  cannot  even  see 
the murti of Bhagvãn within  that  divine  light;  only  the  light  is  seen.  
At  other  times  however,  both  the  divine  light  and  the murti of 
Bhagvãn are  seen.    This  is  known  as sthiti attained  by gnãn.    Such 
sthiti is  attained  by  constantly  maintaining  the vrutti on  the  visible 
murti of Bhagvãn.” 
 
24.3
 Continuing, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “The extent to which a person has 
understood  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn determines  the  intensity  of 

GADHADÃ I 
- 64 - 
both the divine light experienced in the heart, and the divine sounds 
of prãnav that are heard.  Furthermore, the extent of a person’s 
nishchay and  understanding  of  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn determines 
the  extent  to  which  vicious  thoughts  are  diminished.    Therefore, 
when    a    person    develops    absolute nishchay in Bhagvãn and 
thoroughly understands His greatness, all of his vicious thoughts are 
eliminated. 
 
24.4
 “For example, if a person has sucked a slice of lemon, his teeth 
become  a  little  sensitive,  but  he  is  still  able  to  chew  soft  chickpeas.  
However,  if  he  has  sucked  a  whole  lemon,  he  is  unable  to  chew 
chickpeas,  and  will  even  have  difficulty  chewing  mung  beans.    If  he 
has sucked many lemons, he would be unable to chew cooked rice.  In 
the same way, when a person has developed ‘sourness’ (nishchay) in 
Bhagvãn and an understanding of His greatness, his gums as the four 
antah-karans and  the  ten indriyas,  become  sensitised.    In  that  state, 
with  its  gums  as  the man,  the jeev is  unable  to  chew  chickpeas 
(thoughts  for  the vishays).    With  its  gums  as the chitt,  the jeev 
becomes  incapable  of  thinking  of  the vishays.    With  its  gums  as  the 
buddhi, the jeev becomes incapable of developing a determination for 
the vishays.  With its gums as the ahankãr, the jeev becomes incapable 
of   developing   any   form   of   consciousness   related   to   the vishays.  
Similarly, the jeev, with its gums as five gnãn-indriyas and five karma-
indriyas, becomes incapable of chewing chickpeas (vishays). 
 
24.5
 “However, the indriyas and  the antah-karans of  a  person  who  does 
not have absolute nishchay in Bhagvãn and who has not fully realised 
the  greatness  of Bhagvãn,  do  not  withdraw  completely  from  their 
vishays.” 
 
24.6
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then explained, “The svarup of Bhagvãn is  greater 
than Mãyã and its gun, and is free of all types of flaws; but, it is for the 
sake of the kalyãn of jeevs that He appears to be like a human.  In fact, 
Bhagvãn does not have any of the flaws that foolish people assign to 
Him.    However,  the  intellect  of  the  person  who  describes Bhagvãn 

GADHADÃ I 
- 65 - 
with  such  flaws  will  never  be  freed  of  those  flaws  that  he  assigns  to 
Bhagvãn.    Specifically,  a  person  who  believes Bhagvãn to  be  full  of 
kãm will himself become intensely full of kãm; a person who believes 
Bhagvãn to  be  full  of krodh will  himself become  intensely  full  of 
krodh;  a  person  who  believes Bhagvãn to  be  full  of lobh will  himself 
become intensely full of lobh; and a person who believes Bhagvãn to 
be full of irshyã will himself become intensively full of irshyã.  In fact, 
whatever  types  of flaws  a  person  assigns  to Bhagvãn will  ultimately 
cause misery to the person himself – just as a fistful of sand thrown at 
the sun falls back into the eyes of the thrower. 
 
24.7
 “On the other hand, if a person understands Bhagvãn to be absolutely 
flawless, then  regardless  of  his  own svabhãvs,  he  himself  becomes 
absolutely flawless as well.” 
 
24.8
 Then, Brahmãnand Swãmi asked, “Suppose there is a person whose 
indriyas are  not  drawn  towards  any  of  the vishays,  nor  do  vicious 
thoughts  arise  in  his antah-karans.    He  also  has  absolute nishchay in 
Bhagvãn.    Despite  this,  a  feeling  of  dissatisfaction  remains,  and  he 
feels hopeless within.  What can be the reason for this?” 
 
24.9
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “That is a major deficiency in the bhakta.  
Despite the fact that his mind has become stable and that he has firm 
nishchay in Bhagvãn,  he still  fails  to  experience  intense  happiness in 
his  heart.    In  particular,  he  does  not  feel, ‘I am extremely fortunate 
and  completely  fulfilled,  whereas  others  in  the  world  are  constantly 
being  troubled  by  kãm,  krodh,  lobh,  moh,  mad,  matsar,  ãshã,  trushnã.  
They  are  subject  to  the  three  types  of  sufferings  day  and  night.    As  for 
me,   Purushottam   Bhagvãn   has   compassionately   revealed   His   own 
svarup to me.  He has also freed me from kãm, krodh, and all the other 
vicious  natures.    He  has  also  placed  me  in  the  company  of  sãdhus 
similar to Nãrad and the Sanakãdik.  Indeed, I am very fortunate’.  
 
24.10
 “Failing to think in this way and failing to remain extremely delighted 
throughout  the  day is  a  major  deficiency.    In  fact,  such  a bhakta can 
be compared to a child who has been given a chintãmani in its hand, 

GADHADÃ I 
- 66 - 
but  derives  no  happiness  from  it  as  the  child  does  not  realise  the 
chintãmani’s value.    Similarly,  the  major  flaw  in  that bhakta is  that 
despite   having   attained Purushottam Bhagvãn,   he   does   not   feel 
constant delight within by realising, ‘I am completely fulfilled’. 
 
24.11
 “Moreover, when a fault is noticed in a haribhakta,  a  person  should 
think, ‘His  svabhãv  is  such  that  it  is  not  suitable in   satsang; 
nevertheless, he has attained satsang.  Regardless of what he is like, he 
has still remained in satsang.  Then, surely his sanskãrs from past lives 
or  from  this  very  life  must  be  extremely  favourable  for  him  to  have 
attained this satsang’.    With  this  understanding,  he  should  highly 
appreciate even such a person’s gun.” 
 
24.12
 After this talk, Shreeji Mahãrãj bid “Jay Sachidãnand” to everyone and 
returned to His residence. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 24 || 24 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 25 
Ãtmã-Nishthã 
Knowledge Of Bhagvãn Leads To Fulfilment 
 
25.1
 In   the Samvat year   1876,   on   the   morning   of Posh sud 7   [23
rd
 
December,  1819],  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  arrived  at  the  residence  of  the 
paramhans in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was wearing a 
white khes and had covered Himself with a white chofãl.  He had also 
tied  a  white feto around  His  head.    He  was  sitting  facing  east  on  the 
western veranda.  A sabhã of paramhans, as well as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
25.2
 Out  of compassion, Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “A bhakta of Bhagvãn, 
who follows only svadharma, does not feel completely fulfilled within 
his  heart.    That  feeling  of  fulfilment  can  only  be  attained  by ãtmã-
nishthã and   the   knowledge   of Bhagvãn’s greatness.      Moreover, 
absence   of   these   two   qualities,   determines   the   extent   of   the 

GADHADÃ I 
- 67 - 
deficiency  in  this  experience  of  fulfilment.    Therefore,  a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn should firmly develop these two qualities. 
 
25.3
 “The deficiency remaining in these two factors also determines the 
extent  of  the  difficulty  experienced  during samãdhi.    Recently,  I 
granted samãdhi to  a haribhakta in  which  she  saw  intense  divine 
light.    Seeing  the  light,  she  began  to  scream,  and  she  shouted, ‘I’m 
burning!’  Therefore,  even  those  who  experience samãdhi,  require 
knowledge of the ãtmã.  If a person does not realise his own svarup to 
be  the ãtmã,  and  instead  believes  his svarup to  be  the  body,  the 
deficiency will remain.   
 
25.4
 “I explained to that bhakta, ‘Your svarup is the ãtmã, not the body.  You 
are not this Lãdkibai of the Bhãt sub-caste; instead, your svarup is the 
ãtmã, which is achhedhya and abhedhya’.    I  then  placed  her  into 
samãdhi again and told her, ‘Go  to  the  four-petalled  kamal  at  the  site 
of Ganpati, and look at your svarup there’. 
 
25.5
 “When  a  person  in samãdhi enters  the  site  of Ganpati,  that  person 
hears divine sounds and sees divine light.  When he enters the higher 
place  of Brahmã,  he  hears  louder  sounds  and  sees  brighter  light.  
When he enters the still higher place of Vishnu, he hears even louder 
sounds and sees even brighter light.  In this way, as he enters higher 
and  higher  locations,  he  hears  increasingly  louder  sounds  and  sees 
increasingly brighter light.  As a result of the intense divine light seen 
in samãdhi,  and  the  loud  thunderous  sounds  that  occur,  even  the 
most strong-minded become fearful.  
 
25.6
 “For example, despite being a bhakta of Bhagvãn and  despite  being 
extremely   brave,   Arjun   was   incapable   of   beholding Bhagvãn’s 
Vishvarup form.  He therefore pleaded, ‘O Mahãrãj!  I am incapable of 
beholding  this  svarup  of  yours.    Please  grant  me  darshan  of  your 
former svarup’.    Similarly,  in samãdhi,  when  thundering  noises  like 
those  of  an  entire brahmãnd exploding  are  heard,  and  masses  of 

GADHADÃ I 
- 68 - 
intense  light  like  overflowing  oceans  are  seen,  even  the  brave  lose 
their  patience.    Therefore,  a  person  should  understand  his  own 
svarup to be distinct from the body.  
 
25.7
 “Samãdhi experienced in this way is achieved in two ways.  One is by 
controlling  the prãns through prãnãyam,  whereby  the chitt is  also 
controlled.    The  other  is  by  controlling  the chitt,  whereby  the prãns 
are  also  controlled.    When  is  control  over  the chitt achieved?    It  is 
achieved when a person’s vruttis  are  detached  from  everything  else 
and focused only on Bhagvãn.  However, these vruttis can be focused 
on Bhagvãn only when desires for everything else are overcome and 
only a singular desire for the svarup of Bhagvãn remains.  Then, those 
vruttis  will  not  be  deflected  from Bhagvãn’s svarup by  any  means 
whatsoever.  For example, if twenty pails of water were drawn from a 
water-well,  and  the  flow  of  water  from  each  pail  flowed  in  separate 
directions, then there would be little force in each flow.  However, if 
the flows of all twenty pails of water are combined, then the resultant 
flow  would  become  extremely  powerful – like  that  of  a  river – and 
would   not   be   able   to   be   diverted   by   any   means   whatsoever.  
Similarly,  when  a  person’s vruttis   have   become   free   of   worldly 
desires, his chitt focuses only on Bhagvãn’s svarup.  
 
25.8
 “Conversely, when a person has desires in his chitt for the pleasures 
of  the  world,  his vrutti is  widely  dispersed  among  thousands  of 
different  types  of  sounds  heard  via  the  ear;  the vrutti of  the  skin  is 
dispersed  among  thousands  of  different  types  of touch  sensations 
that  are  felt;  the vrutti of  the  eyes  is  dispersed  among  thousands  of 
different  types  of  things  that  are  seen;  the vrutti of  the  tongue  is 
dispersed  among  thousands  of  different  types  of  tastes;  the vrutti of 
the  nose  is  dispersed  among  countless  types  of  smells.    In  the  same 
way,  the vruttis  of  his karma-indriyas are  dispersed  among  their 
respective vishays in thousands of different ways.  In this way, via the 
ten indriyas, his antah-karans are dispersed in thousands of different 
ways.    Only  when  his chitt thinks  about Bhagvãn,  and  his man 

GADHADÃ I 
- 69 - 
generates   thoughts   of Bhagvãn,   and   his buddhi establishes   the 
nishchay in  the svarup of Bhagvãn,  and  his ahankãr thinks ‘I am the 
ãtmã, and a bhakta of Bhagvãn’, can his desire for Bhagvãn be known 
to have become singular. 
 
25.9
 “Alternatively, the control of the chitt by  controlling  the prãns is 
achieved  by ashtãng-yog,  which  comprises  of  eight  stages:   yam, 
niyam, ãsan, prãnãyam, pratyãhãr, dhãran, dhyãn, and samãdhi.  This 
ashtãng-yog is  the  method,  and  its  gift  is  the nirvikalp samãdhi of 
Bhagvãn.      When   this nirvikalp samãdhi is   achieved,   the chitt is 
controlled  by  controlling  the prãns.    On  the  other  hand,  if  the chitt 
focuses  on Bhagvãn after  becoming  free  of  worldly  desires,  then  the 
prãns are controlled by control of the chitt. 
 
25.10
 “Therefore, just as the chitt is  controlled  by  mastering ashtãng-yog, 
similarly, the chitt can also be controlled by focusing on the svarup of 
Bhagvãn.    A bhakta whose chitt’s vrutti becomes  focused  on  the 
svarup of Bhagvãn, masters ashtãng–yog without even attempting to 
master it.  Therefore, the spiritual activities of ãtmã–nishthã and the 
knowledge  of Bhagvãn’s greatness  that  I  have  just  described  should 
be firmly practiced. 
 
25.11
 “Furthermore, a person’s vartmãn dharma – which  are Bhagvãn’s 
ãgnã – should  certainly  be  followed.    For  example,  the dharma of  a 
brãhman is  to  bathe,  lead  a  pure  life,  and  never  drink  even  water 
from  a shudra’s house.    Similarly,  a satsangi should  never  falter  in 
following Bhagvãn’s ãgnã.    This  is  because Bhagvãn will  be  pleased 
with him if he behaves accordingly. 
 
25.12
 “Moreover, a person should very firmly maintain both the knowledge 
of Bhagvãn’s greatness as well as the knowledge of the ãtmã coupled 
with vairãgya.    He  should  also  feel  fulfilled  by  realising, ‘Now I have 
no  deficiencies  remaining’.      With   this   understanding,   he   should 
constantly  offer bhakti to Bhagvãn.    Having  said  this,  he  should  not 
get  carried  away in  the  joy  of  this  understanding,  and nor  should he 
feel unfulfilled.  If he does feel unfulfilled, then the blessings that have 

GADHADÃ I 
- 70 - 
been  showered  upon  him  by Bhagvãn can  be  considered  as  not 
having germinated – like a seed sown in saline soil.  Conversely, if he 
gets  carried  away  and  begins  to  behave  disobediently,  then  that  is 
like  having  thrown  a  seed  into  a  fire,  which  burns  it.    Therefore,  if  a 
person  understands  as  I  have  explained,  then  no  form  of  deficiency 
will remain.” 
 
25.13
 After saying this, Shreeji Mahãrãj returned to His seat.  
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 25 || 25 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 26 
A True Rasik Bhakta 
The Nirgun State 
 
26.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on  the  afternoon  of Posh sud 11  [27
th
 
December,   1819],   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  east-facing  rooms  of  Dãdã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  had  tied  a  white pãgh around  His 
head.    He  was  wearing  a white khes and  had covered  Himself  with  a 
white chofãl.  Two large guldãvadi flowers had been placed upon His 
ears, and a tassel of flowers had been inserted in His pãgh.  A sabhã of 
paramhans, as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered 
before  Him.    Some  of  the paramhans were  singing kirtans to  the 
accompaniment of a pakhvãj. 
 
26.2
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Please stop singing, and listen as I sing a 
kirtan in the form of talks.” 
 
26.3
 The paramhans said, “Very well, Mahãrãj.  Please do.” 
 
26.4
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “If a person is attracted only by Bhagvãn’s 
svarup while  singing rasik kirtans,  then  that  is  fine.    But,  being 
attracted  to  anything  other  than Bhagvãn’s svarup signifies  a  major 

GADHADÃ I 
- 71 - 
deficiency.  This is because just as that bhakta develops affection for 
and  is  attracted by  sounds  related  to Bhagvãn,  he  also  develops 
affection  for  and  is  attracted  by  worldly  songs,  musical  instruments, 
and talks related to women.  Such a bhakta should be known to lack 
wisdom.    Therefore,  a  person  who  is  attracted  equally  by  the  words 
of Bhagvãn and  His sant,  and  by  worldly  speech,  should  abandon 
such  foolishness.    Having  abandoned  such  foolishness,  he  should 
experience  happiness  through  sounds  and  speech  related  only  to 
Bhagvãn.  Such a person is a true rasik bhakta. 
 
26.5
 “Furthermore, just  as  that rasik  bhakta wishes  for  sounds  related 
only  to Bhagvãn,  he  desires  only  the  touch  of Bhagvãn.    When  he 
realises that other types of touch are like touching a black cobra or a 
blazing   fire,   he   is   a   true rasik bhakta.      Similarly,   if   a   person 
experiences extreme bliss on seeing Bhagvãn, and realises everything 
else to be like a pile of filth or a dead dog, then he is true rasik bhakta.  
Similarly,  if  a  person  experiences  extreme  bliss  after  tasting  the 
prasãd of Bhagvãn,  and  not  from  enjoying  other  various  types  of 
tastes, then he is a true rasik bhakta. 
 
26.6
 “Furthermore, such a bhakta experiences profound bliss on smelling 
tulsi,  garlands  of  flowers,  and  many  varieties  of  small  fragrant  items 
like perfume and sandalwood that have been offered to Bhagvãn.  He 
is  not  pleased  on  smelling  the  perfume, sandalwood,  or  garlands  of 
flowers  worn  by  people.   In  this  way,  a  person  who  has  intense  love 
for panch-vishays related   to Bhagvãn and   an   intense   dislike   for 
worldly panch-vishays is a true rasik bhakta.   
 
26.7
 “On the other hand, a person who becomes a rasik bhakta,  but  still 
derives  the  same  pleasure  from  other  types  of shabda,  sparsh,  rup, 
ras,  and  gandh as  he  does  from Bhagvãn–related vishays, is  a  false 
rasik bhakta.   This  is  because  he  experiences  the  same  type  of  joy 
from vishays as he does from Bhagvãn.  Therefore, such affection and 
mode  of  worship  should  be  abandoned.    This  is  because  it  is  not 

GADHADÃ I 
- 72 - 
Bhagvãn who  is  at  fault – it  is  the rasik bhakta’s attitude  that  is  at 
fault, as he has believed Bhagvãn to be exactly like other objects.  As a 
result, his bhakti and affection are flawed. 
 
26.8
 “Now, just as I have described caution in indulging in the five types of 
vishays for the sthul body in the jãgrat state, similarly, subtle vishays 
exist  for  the sukshma body  in  the svapna state.    A bhakta may 
experience   happiness   from shabda,   sparsh,   rup,   ras,   and   gandh 
related to Bhagvãn on seeing the svarup of Bhagvãn in his dream, but 
if he also derives exactly the same pleasure on seeing other vishays in 
his dream, then that bhakta’s affection is false.  On the other hand, if a 
person  in  his  dream  experiences  happiness  only  by  association  with 
Bhagvãn and feels a dislike for other vishays as if they were vomited 
food,  then  he  can  be  said  to  be  a  true rasik bhakta.    However,  if  he 
does not have a dislike for the other vishays, then although the svarup 
of Bhagvãn seen  in  his  dream  is  true,  that bhakta’s understanding  is 
flawed.   This is  because  he  has  equal  love  for Bhagvãn and  for other 
vishays.    Therefore,  true  understanding  is  to  remain  attracted  only 
towards the svarup of Bhagvãn, and not towards other vishays.  
  
26.9
 “In this way, when only thoughts of Bhagvãn remain  while  thinking, 
the mind becomes completely void, with the exception of the murti of 
Bhagvãn, and that bhakta does not identify the body or the brahmãnd 
at  all.    Then,  while  seeing  the murti of Bhagvãn within  that  void, 
divine light is generated, and the murti of Bhagvãn is seen within that 
light.    So,  love  towards  only  the svarup of Bhagvãn in  this  way,  is 
called pati-vratã bhakti.” 
 
26.10
 In conclusion, Shreeji Mahãrãj added, “When you sing rasik kirtans, I 
also close my eyes and think about just this.  These thoughts of mine 
may be simple, but nothing is able to persist in those thoughts except 
Bhagvãn.  In fact, my thoughts are so powerful that if any vishay were 
to come in the way of the rasik love that I have for Bhagvãn’s svarup, 
its  head  would  be  cut  off.    Just  as  you  prepare  a kirtan to  sing,  I 

GADHADÃ I 
- 73 - 
prepared  this kirtan in  the  form  of  a  talk,  which  I  have  shared  with 
you all today.” 
 
26.11
 In  this  way,  using  Himself  as  an  example,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  delivered 
these talks for the benefit of His bhaktas. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 26 || 26 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 27 
The Power Of Bhagvãn 
Bhagvãn Resides In The Heart Of A Sant 
 
27.1
 In   the Samvat year   1876,   before   sunrise   on Posh sud 12   [28
th
 
December,  1819],  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  arrived  at  the  residential  hall  of 
the paramhans in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    There,  He  sat 
on a platform facing west.  He had tied a white feto around His head, 
and he was wearing a khes.  He had also covered Himself with a white 
chofãl.  A sabhã of paramhans had gathered before Him. 
 
27.2
 After a few minutes of deep thought, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Everyone 
wishes    to    worship Bhagvãn,    but    their    understanding    differs.  
Bhagvãn fully  resides  in  the  heart  of  a  person  who  possesses  the 
following  understanding: ‘The earth remains stable and trembles; the 
stars remain steady in the sky; the rains fall; the sun rises and sets; the 
moon appears and disappears, and it waxes and wanes; the vast oceans 
remain  constrained  within  their  boundaries;  a  drop  of  liquid  develops 
into a human possessing hands, feet, a nose, ears, and the rest of the ten 
indriyas; the clouds, through which lightning strikes, float unsupported 
in the sky – these and a countless variety of the other wonders are only 
due to the Bhagvãn that I have attained’. With this understanding, he 
has the belief that no one except the pratyaksha svarup of Bhagvãn is 
the cause of these wonders.  He realises, ‘The countless wonders which 
have  occurred  in  the  past,  those  which  are  currently  taking  place,  and 

GADHADÃ I 
- 74 - 
those which will occur in the future, are all only due to the pratyaksha 
svarup of Bhagvãn that I have attained’. 
 
27.3
 “Moreover, he also understands that ‘Even if someone were to throw 
dust on me, or were to humiliate me in any way, or were to seat me on 
a donkey after cutting off my nose and ears, or even if someone were to 
honour me by seating me on an elephant – all these situations would be 
equal for me’.    Such  a bhakta views  a  beautiful  young  woman  with 
equality,  he  treats  a  heap  of  gold  and  a  pile  of  stones  with  equality, 
and  he  also  possesses  countless  glorious  qualities,  such  as gnãn, 
bhakti, and vairãgya.  Bhagvãn eternally resides in the heart of such a 
bhakta. 
 
27.4
 “Consequently, by the grace of Bhagvãn, that bhakta attains countless 
types  of  power,  and  gives kalyãn to  countless  beings.    Despite  these 
powers,  he  tolerates  the  praises  and  insults  of  other  people.    This 
itself is also a great achievement, because to tolerate insults, despite 
being  so  powerful,  is  not  easy  for  others  to  achieve.    Therefore,  a 
person   who   tolerates   in   this   way   should   be   considered   to   be 
extremely great. 
 
27.5
 “The powers of such a person are such that Bhagvãn sees through his 
eyes,  which  empowers  the  eyes  of  all  the  beings  in  the brahmãnd; 
and since it is Bhagvãn who walks through his legs, he is also capable 
of  giving  the  strength  to  walk  to  the  legs  of  all  the  beings  in  the 
brahmãnd.    Therefore,  since  it  is Bhagvãn who  resides  in  all  the 
indriyas of such a sant, that sant us able to give power to the indriyas 
of all the life-forms in the brahmãnd.  Therefore, such a sant sustains 
the  world.    His  greatness  lies  in  the  fact  that  he  tolerates  the  insults 
delivered even by insignificant people.  Only those who are forgiving 
in this way should be considered to be extremely great. 
 
27.6
 “On the other hand, those who threaten and frighten  those  who  are 
more humble than themselves, and believe ‘I have become great’, are 
not  truly  great.    In  fact,  those  people  in  this  world  who  frighten 
others  by  showing  extraordinary  powers,  should  not  be  considered 

GADHADÃ I 
- 75 - 
to  be bhaktas  of Bhagvãn.    Instead,  they  are jeevs lost  in mãyã,  and 
are  only  suitable  for Yampuri.    Their  greatness  is  limited  to  the 
worldly  life.    For  example,  in  society,  a  person  with  one  horse  is 
considered to be greater than someone with no horses at all, whereas 
a  person  with  five  horses  is  considered  to  be  greater  than  someone 
with  only  one  horse.    In  this  way,  the  wealthier  a  person  is,  the 
greater  he is considered  to  be  in  society.    However,  such  a  person  is 
not great in worshipping Bhagvãn.” 
 
27.7
 Continuing,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “A   grahastha or   sãdhu who 
believes, ‘This woman is very beautiful; these clothes are extremely 
fashionable; this medi is very nice; and this utensil is very lovely’,  has 
little  knowledge.    Then,  you  may  ask, ‘Will such people attain kalyãn 
or  not?’  Well,  in  this satsang,  even  the  wretched  attain kalyãn.  
However,  the  people  described  never  develop  the  qualities  of  a 
sãdhu, or the glorious qualities of the sant previously described.  This 
is because they have not become suitable for such nobility.” 
 
27.8
 After delivering these talks, Shreeji Mahãrãj bid “Jay Sachidãnand” to 
all, and returned to His residence in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 27 || 27 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 28 
The Nature Of A Person Who Will Fall From Satsang 
 
28.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on Posh sud 14  [30
th
 December,  1819], 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on  the  veranda 
outside the room in line with the room of Shree Vãsudev-Nãrãyan, in 
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was dressed entirely in white 
clothes.  At that time, the sãdhus had sat down to eat in His presence. 
 
28.2
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “When a satsangi is  likely  to  fall  from 
satsang,  vicious  desires  steadily  flourish  within  him.    At  first,  he 

GADHADÃ I 
- 76 - 
begins to perceive avgun in all satsangis day by day.  In his heart, he 
feels,  ‘All  of  these  satsangis  lack  understanding;  only  I  have  true 
understanding’.  In this way, he considers himself to be superior to all.  
Such  a  person  remains  constantly  uneasy,  day  and  night.    He  cannot 
sit  peacefully  anywhere  during  the  day;  nor  can  he  sleep  at  night.  
Moreover, his anger never subsides.  In fact, he constantly smoulders 
like  a  half-burnt  log.    A  person  who  behaves  in  this  way  should  be 
known  to  be  on  the  verge  of  falling  out  of satsang.  No  matter  how 
many  days  he  spends  in satsang,  he  will  never  experience  peace  in 
his heart.  Therefore, he will fall from satsang. 
 
28.3
 “Conversely, when a person is likely to advance in satsang,  pure 
desires  steadily  flourish  within  him.    Day  by  day,  he perceives  only 
gun in  all satsangis;  he  views  all bhaktas as  superior  to  himself  and 
considers  himself  to  be  insignificant.    Moreover,  he  experiences  the 
bliss   of satsang in   his   heart   twenty-four   hours   a   day.      Such 
characteristics indicate that pure desires have flourished.  In fact, the 
more   such   a   person   practices satsang,   the   more   he   benefits.  
Eventually, he attains extreme greatness.” 
 
28.4
 Having  delivered  this  talk, Shreeji Mahãrãj bid “Jay Sachidãnand” to 
all and returned to His seat. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 28 || 28 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 29 
Intensifying Dharma, Gnãn, Vairãgya, And Bhakti 
Prãrabdha, Grace, And Effort 
 
29.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on  the  evening  of Posh sud Punam [31
st 
December,   1819],   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  west-facing  rooms  of  Dãdã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was wearing a white khes and had 
covered  Himself  with  a  white chofãl.    He had  also  tied  a  white pãgh 

GADHADÃ I 
- 77 - 
around  His  head.    He  was  wearing  garlands  of  white  flowers,  and  a 
tassel  of  white  flowers  was  hanging  from  His pãgh.    A sabhã of 
sãdhus,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before Him. 
 
29.2
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Please ask a question.” 
 
29.3
 Then, Gopãlãnand Swãmi asked, “How can the force of bhakti coupled 
with dharma, gnãn, and vairãgya be intensified?” 
 
29.4
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “There are four means to accomplish this: 
The  first  is  a  pure desh,  the  second  is  a  pleasant kãl,  the  third  is 
spiritual kriyã, and the fourth is the sang of a sat-purush.  Of these, the 
influence of desh, kãl, and sang are more powerful than kriyã.  This is 
because, if a desh is pure, and kãl is pure, and a person also keeps the 
sang of sant like  yourself,  then kriyã will  naturally  be  pure  as  well.  
Conversely, if a desh is impure – like the region of Sindh, if the kãl is 
impure,  and  if  a  person  also  keeps  the sang of  prostitutes  and 
perverted  people,  or  of  those  who  consume  alcohol  and  meat,  then 
kriyã will  certainly  be  impure  as  well.    Therefore,  a  person  should 
stay  where  there  is  a  pure desh,  and  should  abandon  a  place  where 
the kãl has  become  unpleasant.    A  person  should  keep  the sang of  a 
bhakta of Bhagvãn,  as  well as  the sang of  a sant who  abides  by  the 
panch-vartmãn.    As  a  result,  a haribhakta’s bhakti for Bhagvãn gains 
tremendous energy.  This is the answer to your question.” 
 
29.5
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, initially a haribhakta may 
be very impure at heart, but he later becomes extremely pure.  Is this 
due  to  his  previous sanskãrs,  the  grace  of Bhagvãn,  or  the bhakta’s 
personal efforts?” 
 
29.6
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “The good or bad that occurs due to 
person’s previous sanskãrs is apparent to everyone in the world.  For 
instance,  the  cause  of  Bharatji  becoming  attached  to  a  deer  can  be 

GADHADÃ I 
- 78 - 
understood  to  be  due  to prãrabdha.    Or,  if  a  poor  person  were  to 
receive  a  large  kingdom,  then  everyone  would  come  to  know  of  it.  
That should be known as prãrabdha.” 
 
29.7
 Then,    narrating    His    own    story,    Shreeji    Mahãrãj    continued, 
“Considering  the  spiritual  activities  I  have  performed,  it  is 
unimaginable  that my  body  has survived such  strictness,  yet  even  in 
those circumstances it did survive.  That can be considered to be due 
to prãrabdha.    What  were  those  circumstances?    Well,  while  staying 
in  Purushottam-Puri,  I  spent  many  months  surviving  merely  on  air.  
On one occasion, I allowed my body to be carried away by a river that 
was   four   to   five   miles   wide.      During   the   winter,   summer,   and 
monsoon,  I  stayed  without  shelter,  wearing  only  a  loincloth.    I  also 
used  to  wander  in  the  jungle  amongst  wild  animals  such  as  tigers, 
elephants,  and  wildebeests.    I  travelled  in  many  frightful  conditions, 
yet  my  body  did  not  perish.    In  these  situations,  a  person  should 
consider prãrabdha to be responsible.   
 
29.8
 “Now, consider the son of the brãhman named Sãndipani  whose  son 
was  saved  from Narak,  and  when  five-year-old  Dhruvji  prayed  to 
Bhagvãn,   the   meanings   of   the   Veds   and   other shãstras were 
spontaneously revealed to him.  In these situations – as well as when 
a person’s mind is purified by the wish of Bhagvãn or by His grace, or 
by the grace of His ekãntik sãdhu who has been pleased by a person’s 
extremely pure sentiments – the influence of Bhagvãn’s grace should 
be considered to be responsible. 
29.9
 “If a person keeps the sang of  a  devout sãdhu and  becomes  virtuous 
through his own thoughts, then that is known as purush-prayatna.” 
 
29.10
 Having said this, Shreeji Mahãrãj bid “Jay Sachidãnand” to the sabhã 
and returned to His seat laughing. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 29 || 29 || 
 
 

GADHADÃ I 
- 79 - 
Gadhadã I – 30 
The Influence Of The Gun Of Mãyã 
 
30.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on  the  evening  of Posh  vad 1  [1
st 
January, 
1820],  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting on  a  decorated  bedstead  on  the 
veranda  outside  the  room  facing  north,  in  line  with  the mandir of 
Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan, in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He 
was  wearing  a  white khes and  had  covered  Himself  with  a  white 
chãdar.  He had also tied a white feto around His head, with tassels of 
white  flowers  hanging  from  it.    He  was  wearing  a  garland  of  white 
flowers,  bunches  of  white  flowers  were  placed  above  His  ears.    He 
was also wearing berkhã of white flowers around His wrists.  A sabhã 
of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before Him.  Some of the munis were singing kirtans. 
 
30.2
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then requested, “Please begin a question-answer 
discussion.” 
 
30.3
 Dinã-Nãth Bhatt then asked, “At times,  thousands  of  thoughts  arise, 
yet  they  do  not  leave  a  lasting  impression  in  the  mind.    At  other 
times,   only   an   irrelevant   thought   arises,   yet   it   leaves   a   strong 
impression  in  the  mind.    What  is  the  reason  for  this?    Also,  by  what 
means can a bhakta eliminate such disturbing thoughts?” 
 
30.4
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “The reason is the influence of the gun.  
Thoughts  occurring  when tamo-gun is  predominant,  induce  a  state 
similar  to  that  of sushupti.    Therefore,  those  thoughts  do  not  leave  a 
lasting  impression  in  the  mind.    When sattva-gun prevails,  a  person 
experiences a state of awareness.  Therefore, any disturbing thoughts 
that  occur  at  that  time,  are  dispelled  by  thinking.    Therefore,  those 
thoughts do not leave a lasting impression either.  However, thoughts 
that  arise  when rajo-gun is  prevalent,  leave  a  lasting  impression  in 
the  mind.    Therefore,  the  reason  some  thoughts  do  leave  a  lasting 
impression in the mind and others do not, is due to the prevalence of 
the different gun. 

GADHADÃ I 
- 80 - 
30.5
 “If an intelligent  person  reflects  on  this  matter  and  examines  his 
thoughts whenever they arise, he will be able to recognise which gun 
is  predominant  in  him  at  that  particular  time.    However,  subtle 
thoughts  that  arise  repeatedly  from  moment  to  moment  cannot  be 
grasped  by  anyone.    At  the  most,  someone  intelligent  like  yourself 
may be able to distinguish two, three, or four of the more superficial 
thoughts that arise during the course of a day. 
 
30.6
 “So,  if  a  person  examines  the  predominant gun under   whose 
influence  his  thoughts  arise,  and  thinks  about  the  spiritual  talks 
which  takes  place  in satsang,  then  the  power  of satsang is  such  that 
any  disturbing  thoughts,  which  arise  under  the  influence  of  the gun, 
are  dispelled.    Then,  becoming  free  from  all  doubts,  he  is  able  to 
continuously concentrate on the svarup of Bhagvãn.  
 
30.7
 “Without satsang,  even  if  a  person  carries  out  millions  of  spiritual 
activities,  disturbing  thoughts  and  the  influence  of rajo-gun and  the 
other gun will  not  be  eradicated.    Therefore,  if  someone  sincerely 
practices satsang and  reflects  upon  the  talks  relating  to Bhagvãn, 
then his vile thoughts will be eradicated.  In this way, the influence of 
satsang is extremely powerful.  In fact, no other spiritual activity can 
compare  with satsang.    Therefore, a  person  who  wishes  to  rid  the 
mind   of   thoughts   related   to rajo-gun, should   sincerely   practice 
satsang by thought, word, and deed.  As a result, disturbing thoughts 
will be eradicated due to the power of satsang.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 30 || 30 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 31 
The Person With Bhakti Is Best 
 
31.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on  the  evening  of Posh  vad 2  [2
nd
 January, 
1820],   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   mattress   with   a   large, 
cylindrical  pillow  that  had  been  placed  on  the  east-facing  veranda 

GADHADÃ I 
- 81 - 
outside His residence in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was 
dressed entirely in white clothes. 
 
31.2
 At that time, Yogãnand Muni asked, “Mahãrãj, suppose there are two 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn.    One bhakta follows nivrutti and  does  not  hurt 
anyone  verbally.    The  other,  is  constantly  serving Bhagvãn and  His 
bhaktas, by offering food, clothes, and flowers.  However, in doing so, 
he  may  occasionally  hurt  someone  verbally.    Of  these  two bhaktas, 
who is better?” 
 
31.3
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  did  not  answer  the  question.    Instead,  He  called  for 
Muktãnand  Swãmi  and Brahmãnand  Swãmi.    He  had  them  listen  to 
the question, and then requested, “Please answer this question.” 
 
31.4
 Both  Muktãnand  Swãmi  and Brahmãnand  Swãmi  then  answered.  
“The bhakta who  may  verbally  hurt  someone,  but  serves Bhagvãn 
and His sant, is better.  The bhakta who follows nivrutti and does not 
hurt  anyone,  and  is  therefore  unable  to  serve Bhagvãn and  His sant, 
should  therefore  be  known  to  be  feeble.    The bhakta who  serves 
others can be described as having bhakti.  Therefore, the bhakta with 
bhakti is the better of the two.” 
 
31.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj confirmed, “The answer you have given is correct.”  
He then added, “It  is  a  major  weakness  if  a  person  notices  a  small 
avgun in  someone  who  possesses  this bhakti and  completely  abides 
by Bhagvãn’s ãgnã, and then develops hatred for him.  A person who 
perceives avgun in  this  way  may  also  perceive avgun in Bhagvãn, 
who has assumed a human form for the purpose of granting kalyãn to 
the jeevs.   He  may  also  perceive avgun in  the  profoundly  great 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn. 
 
31.6
 “Moreover, just because such a person alleges such faults in Bhagvãn 
or  His sant,  does  that  mean  the avatãrs of Bhagvãn or sant are 
incapable  of  granting kalyãn?    They  are  indeed  capable  of  granting 

GADHADÃ I 
- 82 - 
kalyãn.      However,   a   person   whose  intellect   is  distorted,   always 
negatively misinterprets things.  For example, Shishupãl always said, 
‘The Pãndavs are from a different cast.  They are immoral because all 
five  of  them  have  the  same wife.    Krishna  is  also  a  scoundrel,  because 
from the moment He was born, He first killed a woman, then He killed a 
crane,  and  then  He  killed  a  calf.    He  is  known  as  Madhusudan  not 
because  He  killed  a  demon  named  Madhu,  but  because  he  destroyed 
honeycombs.  Just because those Pãndavs worship Him, does that make 
Him Bhagvãn?’  In  this  way,  Shishupãl,  with  his  demonic  intellect, 
identified avgun in Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas.    However,  the bhaktas 
of Bhagvãn did  not  do  so  in  any  way.    Therefore,  a  person  who 
perceives avgun should be known to have a demonic intellect.” 
 
31.7
 Hearing this, Yogãnand Muni said, “Mahãrãj, we do not perceive 
avgun in  the  great bhaktas of Bhagvãn,  but  we  do  perceive avgun in 
ordinary bhaktas.” 
 
31.8
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A bhakta’s greatness  or  smallness  is  not 
measured  the  way  you  seem  to  understand  it.    Greatness  is  due  to  a 
person’s nishchay in   the pratyaksha svarup of Bhagvãn and   by 
following  His ãgnãs.    However  great  a  person  may  be  in  worldly 
matters, if he lacks these two characteristics, then he is still ordinary. 
 
31.9
 “The greatness which I have just described is present today in all the 
bhaktas in  our satsang.    This  is  because  all  the bhaktas here  realise, 
‘We have found pratyaksha Purushottam Bhagvãn, who is greater than 
even Akshar.  Therefore, we are completely happy’.  Realising this, they 
offer bhakti to pratyaksha Bhagvãn,   while   following   His ãgnãs.  
Therefore, on seeing some irrelevant personal abnormality in such a 
bhakta, a person should not perceive avgun in him.  If a person does 
have a habit of doing so, then his intellect becomes demonic.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 31 || 31 || 
 

GADHADÃ I 
- 83 - 
Gadhadã I – 32 
A Bhakta Always Rests In The Murti Of Bhagvãn 
 
32.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on  the  morning  of Posh vad 3  [3
rd
 January, 
1820],  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on  the 
veranda  outside  the  west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Gadhadã.    He  was  wearing  a  white khes and  had  tied  a  white pãgh 
around  his  head.    He  had  also  covered  Himself  with a  white chãdar, 
and His forehead had been smeared with sandalwood paste.  He was 
wearing a garland of white flowers, and a tassel of white flowers was 
hanging from His pãgh. A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from 
various  places,  had  gathered  before Him.    Some  of  the munis were 
singing kirtans. 
 
32.2
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Please listen, I have a question to ask.” 
 
32.3
 The munis and haribhaktas replied, “Mahãrãj, please ask.” 
 
32.4
 After thinking for quite some time, Shree Mahãrãj said, “In this world, 
a  materialistic  individual  who  is  attached  to  the  five vishays,  cannot 
survive  without  indulging  in  them.    Moreover,  just  as  that vimukh 
indulges in the five vishays, a bhakta of Bhagvãn also indulges in five 
vishays.    So,  how  are  the  two  different?  In  what  way?    Well,  the 
materialistic    person    enjoys    worldly vishays without Bhagvãn.  
However,  for  a bhakta of Bhagvãn,  listening  to kathãs  of Bhagvãn is 
the  only vishay for  his  ears;  touching  the charanãvind of Bhagvãn or 
touching  the  holy  dust  from  the holy  feet of  a sant is  the  only vishay 
for his skin; having darshan of Bhagvãn or His sant is the only vishay 
for his eyes; taking the prasãd of Bhagvãn and singing His praises are 
the  only vishays for  his  tongue;  and  scents  of  flowers  and  other 
objects which have been offered to Bhagvãn is the only vishay for his 
nose.    In  this  way,  there  is  a  difference  between  the vishays that  a 
vimukh indulges in and those that a bhakta indulges in. 
 

GADHADÃ I 
- 84 - 
32.5
 “Furthermore, just as a bhakta cannot  stay  without  indulging  in  the 
vishays,  even  eternally  liberated muktas,  such  as Nãrad and  the 
Sanakãdik,  cannot  stay  without  indulging  in  them.    Although  they 
remain  in samãdhi for  long  periods  of  time,  after  emerging from 
samãdhi, they also indulge in vishays in the form kathãs, kirtans, and 
talks of Bhagvãn. 
 
32.6
 “For  example,  birds  leave  their  nests  to  gather  food,  but  after 
gathering their food, they always return to their nests at night to rest.  
They  never forget their own nests and return to another bird’s nest.  
Similarly,  after  feeding  on kathãs, kirtans,  and  talks  of Bhagvãn, 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn also return to their own nest (Bhagvãn’s svarup) 
to rest.  Also, animals, birds, and in fact, all creatures, return to their 
own homes to rest after feeding.  People also travel far and wide for 
their work, but only when they return to their own home do they rest 
peacefully. 
 
32.7
 “Now, based on the analogies that I have just narrated, I ask all the 
haribhaktas a question: Just as a vimukh is attached to the five vishays 
and  is  unable  to  live  without  them  for  even  a  single  moment,  have 
you becoming firmly attached to the vishays in the form of the kathãs, 
kirtans,  and  talks  of Bhagvãn,  or  not?    I  also  ask  another  question: 
Just as a bird returns to its nest after feeding, do all of you also return 
to  rest  in  your  nest  (Bhagvãn),  after  feeding  on kathãs, kirtans,  and 
talks of Bhagvãn?  Or, do you rest elsewhere? 
 
32.8
 “Additionally, domesticated cattle return to their post in the evening 
after  grazing  on  the  outskirts  of  the  village,  whereas  stray  cattle  do 
not return to their post.  A stray cow, after grazing in someone’s field, 
sits wherever it wishes.  There, someone may beat it, or it may even 
be  attacked  by  a  tiger.    Now,  do  you  return  to  your  post  like  the 
domesticated  cattle,  or  do  you  sit  down  to  rest  anywhere  after 
grazing in someone else’s field like the stray cattle?  Those who are 
senior amongst you, think about your answer to these questions.” 

GADHADÃ I 
- 85 - 
32.9
 Then,  all  the munis and bhaktas replied individually, “Mahãrãj, we 
have  indeed  become  attached  to kathãs, kirtans,  and  talks  related  to 
Bhagvãn.    Except  for  the  nest  and  post  (Bhagvãn’s murti),  we  do  not 
stay anywhere else.”  Hearing their reply, Shreeji Mahãrãj became 
extremely pleased. 
 
32.10
 On that same day, towards the end of the afternoon, Shreeji Mahãrãj 
was seated on a large decorated bedstead under the neem tree in the 
centre of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr, facing the mandir of Shree Vãsudev-
Nãrãyan.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various 
places,  had  gathered  before  Him.    Some  of  the munis were  singing 
kirtans. 
 
32.11
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  requested,  “Now,  please  begin  a  question-
answer discussion.” 
 
32.12
 Dinã-Nãth  Bhatt  and Brahmãnand Swãmi asked, “At times,  a bhakta 
of Bhagvãn is  able  to  blissfully  engage  in bhajan and smaran of 
Bhagvãn, and is able to concentrate on His murti.  At other times, he 
is  disturbed  within  and  is  unable  to  experience  the  bliss  of bhajan 
and smaran.  What is the reason for this?” 
 
32.13
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “He  has  not  learned  the  technique  of 
visualising the murti of Bhagvãn.” 
 
32.14
 Hearing this, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “What is that technique?” 
 
32.15
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “The technique is as follows: Different gun 
enter the antah-karans at different times.  When sattva-gun prevails, 
the antah-karans are  pure,  and  a  person  can  pleasantly  engage  in 
bhajan and smaran of Bhagvãn’s murti.    When rajo-gun prevails,  the 
antah-karans become  polluted  and  many  disturbing  thoughts  arise, 
making  it  difficult  to  engage  in bhajan and smaran.    When tamo-gun 
prevails,  no  thoughts  arise  in  the antah-karans at  all.    Therefore,  a 

GADHADÃ I 
- 86 - 
person  engaged  in bhajan should  learn  to  recognise  the  prevailing 
gun and should perform dhyãn upon the murti of Bhagvãn whenever 
sattva-gun prevails.  When tamo-gun prevails, no thoughts arise at all, 
and a person experiences a feeling of emptiness.  A person should not 
attempt  to  perform dhyãn upon Bhagvãn in  such  conditions.    When 
rajo-gun prevails,   many   disturbing   thoughts   arise.      Therefore,   a 
person  should  not  attempt  to  perform dhyãn upon Bhagvãn at  that 
time  either.    On  such  occasions,  a  person  should  think, ‘I am distinct 
from  these  thoughts,  and  I  am  an  ãtmã.    In fact,  I  am  the  knower  of 
these thoughts.  Furthermore, Purushottam Bhagvãn is forever present 
within me as antaryãmi’.    Only  when  the  force  of rajo-gun decreases 
should a person perform dhyãn upon the murti of Bhagvãn. 
 
32.16
 “However, a person should not become  unhappy  on  noticing  the 
many  thoughts  which  arise  when rajo-gun prevails.    After  all,  the 
antah-karans are  like  a  small  child,  or  a  monkey,  or  a  dog,  or  like  a 
person  who  plays  with  a  child.    The  nature  of  the antah-karans are 
such that it remains restless for no reason whatsoever.  Therefore, a 
person  who  wishes  to  perform dhyãn upon Bhagvãn should  not 
become disheartened on seeing the disturbing thoughts that arise in 
the antah-karans.  Moreover, the thoughts arising in the antah-karans 
should  be regarded  as  being  distinct  from  himself.    Therefore,  a 
person  should  engage  in  the bhajan of Bhagvãn,  while  believing  the 
ãtmã to be distinct from himself.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 32 || 32 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 33 
Blind Faith, Love, And Understanding 
 
33.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on  the  evening  of Posh  vad 5  [5
th 
January, 
1820],   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   facing   east   on   a   decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  room  next  to  the mandir of 
Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He 
was  wearing  a  white khes and  had  covered  Himself  with  a  white 

GADHADÃ I 
- 87 - 
chãdar.    He  had  also  tied  a reto,  with  deep  orange  ends,  around  His 
head.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places, 
had gathered before Him. 
 
33.2
 Muktãnand  Swãmi  then  asked,  “The shãstras have    described 
countless spiritual activities that please Bhagvãn.  Amongst them all, 
which one is so powerful that it alone earns as much bliss of Bhagvãn, 
as  is  earned  by  performing  all  spiritual  activities  combined?   Please 
reveal it to us.” 
 
33.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Please listen as I tell you the one spiritual 
activity  by  which Bhagvãn can be pleased.”  He then continued, 
“Accepting the firm refuge of Bhagvãn is  the  single,  greatest  activity 
amongst  all  spiritual  activities  for  pleasing Bhagvãn.    However,  that 
refuge must be extremely firm and without any flaws. 
 
33.4
 “There are three types of refuge.  One way of having the refuge of 
Bhagvãn is  with  blind  faith.    If  a  person  has  intense  blind  faith,  then 
even if someone such as Brahmã were to attempt to deflect him from 
his refuge, he would not be deflected. 
 
33.5
 “The second type is firm refuge of Bhagvãn that is created out of love.  
Whoever  has  intense  love  for Bhagvãn,  cannot  even  forcibly  be 
attracted  to  any object  other  than Bhagvãn.    This  is  known  as  firm 
refuge produced out of intense love. 
 
33.6
 “The third type is refuge with understanding.  A person who has 
great  intelligence  understands  the sagun-nirgun and anvay-vyatirek 
aspects of Bhagvãn.    He understands  entities  that have  been  created 
by Bhagvãn’s Mãyã,  as  well  as  the  ways Bhagvãn takes avatãrs on 
earth.    He  also  understands  how,  at  the  time  of  creation  of  the 
universe, Bhagvãn behaves   as Akshar,   how Bhagvãn behaves   as 
Prakruti-Purush,    how Bhagvãn behaves    as Virãt-Purush,    how 
Bhagvãn behaves   as Brahmã and   other prajãpatis.      He   also 
understands  how Bhagvãn works  through  those  like Nãrad and  the 

GADHADÃ I 
- 88 - 
Sanakãdik,  for  the  purpose  of  granting kalyãn to  the jeevs.    He 
understands all these methods. 
 
33.7
 “Moreover, he realises that Purushottam Bhagvãn is  greater  than 
everything   and   is   absolutely   unaffected.      He   who   has   such   an 
understanding  is  said  to  have  a  firm  refuge  of Bhagvãn using  his 
intelligence.  If someone tries to discourage him, or even if he tries to 
discourage himself, such refuge never fades away.  Also, regardless of 
whether Bhagvãn – assuming  a  human svarup – displays  His  divine 
power or acts powerless, such a person’s intellect would not hold any 
doubts.”  
 
33.8
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “If you allow me, I wish to ask a question.” 
 
33.9
 Muktãnand Swãmi replied, “Mahãrãj, please do ask.” 
 
33.10
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then asked, “Of the three characteristics I have just 
described to you, which is your strength?  Although a combination of 
all  three is  found  in  all bhaktas of Bhagvãn,  the  characteristic  that  is 
strongest,  is  said  to  be  the  strength  they  posses.    So,  of  the  three – 
blind faith, love, and understanding – which is your strength?” 
 
33.11
 Muktãnand   Swãmi   and Brahmãnand   Swãmi   both   replied,  “Our 
characteristic is of understanding.” 
 
33.12
 Then, the other sãdhus also stated their own strengths. 
 
||End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 33 || 33 || 
            
 
Gadhadã I – 34 
Love Is The Mãyã Of Bhagvãn 
Do Not Disobey The Ãgnã Of Bhagvãn 
 
34.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on  the  morning  of Posh  vad 11  [11
th
 
January,   1820],   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   facing   south   on   a 
decorated bedstead on the veranda outside the west-facing rooms of 

GADHADÃ I 
- 89 - 
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was wearing a white khes and 
had  covered  Himself  with  a  white chofãl.    He  had  also  tied  a  white 
pãgh around His head, and was wearing garlands of flowers.  Tassels 
of  flowers  and  silken  threads  were  hanging  from  His pãgh,  and 
bunches of flowers had been placed above both of His ears.  A sabhã 
of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before   Him.      Some   of   the munis were   singing kirtans to   the 
accompaniment of musical instruments. 
 
34.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Please stop the kirtans,  and  begin  a 
question-answer discussion.” 
 
34.3
 Then, Brahmãnand Swãmi asked, “Bhagvãn is  the  cause  of  all  bliss, 
and  He  is  greater  than  everything,  yet  the jeev’s vrutti does  not 
become  attached  to  Him.    Instead,  its vrutti becomes  attached  to 
worldly  objects  that  are  worthless  and  perishable.    What  is  the 
reason for this?” 
 
34.4
 Muktãnand Swãmi attempted to give an answer, but was unable to do 
so adequately.   
 
34.5
 So Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Please listen as I answer that question.  
Since  the  day Bhagvãn created  this  world,  He  has  set  it  in  motion  in 
such a  way  that  he  will  not  have  to make an  effort  again.    In  fact, He 
has  devised  it  in  such  a  way  that  procreation  occurs  automatically.  
Men   naturally   develop   affection   for   women,   women   naturally 
develop  affection  for  men,  and  both  naturally  develop  affection  for 
their children.  That is Bhagvãn’s mãyã in the form of affection. 
 
34.6
 “The vrutti of  a  person  who  is  not  swept  away  by  the  flow  of  that 
mãyã,  remains  focused  on  the svarup of Bhagvãn.    So,  a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn develops vairãgya by  maintaining  a  dislike  for  worldly 
objects.  Furthermore, knowing Bhagvãn to be absolutely blissful, he 
keeps  his vrutti focused  on Bhagvãn.    However,  if  a  person  does  not 

GADHADÃ I 
- 90 - 
develop vairãgya towards  worldly  objects  and becomes  distanced 
from  the svarup of Bhagvãn,  then  even  great muktas,  such  as Shiv, 
Brahmã,  and Nãrad,  would  be  swept  away  by  those  worldly  objects.  
For   this   reason,   if   a   person   abandons Bhagvãn and   keeps   the 
company   of   worldly   objects,   then   his vrutti will   most   certainly 
become  attached  to  those  worldly  objects.    Therefore,  a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn should not keep affection for anything other than Bhagvãn.” 
 
34.7
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Now, it is Muktãnand Swãmi’s turn to ask 
a question, so please ask.” 
 
34.8
 Muktãnand Swãmi then asked, “It is extremely difficult for a person 
to  attain Bhagvãn.    Moreover,  there  is  no  greater  benefit  and  no 
greater  bliss  than  attaining Bhagvãn.    Then,  why  do  people  abandon 
such  immense  bliss  and  struggle  painfully  for  worthless  objects?  
That is the question.” 
 
34.9
 Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Here, I shall answer that.  A person suffers 
when he ignores the ãgnã of Bhagvãn and beings to stray away from 
them.    On  the  other  hand,  if  he  acts  according  to  those ãgnã,  he  will 
experience the true bliss of Bhagvãn.  So, a person suffers only to the 
extent  that  he  disobeys  the ãgnã of Bhagvãn.    Therefore, tyãgis 
should live according to the ãgnã that have been prescribed for tyãgi, 
and grahasthas should  live  according  to  the ãgnã that  have  been 
prescribed for grahasthas. 
 
34.10
 “A person suffers to the extent that he lapses in following these ãgnã.  
Only  when  a tyãgi follows  the  eight  types  of tyãg of  women,  is  his 
vow  of brahm-chãrya considered  complete.    He  suffers  to  the  extent 
that  he  deviates  from  this.   Brahm-chãrya has  also  been  prescribed 
for grahasthas.    For  them, brahm-chãrya constitutes  shunning  all 
women except their wives, abstinence from sexual relations with his 
wife  on  days  of  religious  occasions,  and  engaging  in  sexual  relations 
only  during  appropriate  times.    Whoever  deviates  from  these  and 
other niyams that  have  been  prescribed  for tyãgis and grahasthas, 
will suffer accordingly. 

GADHADÃ I 
- 91 - 
34.11
 “Therefore, the happiness and misery experienced by a vimukh is 
determined   by   his   own karmas.      As   for   a bhakta of Bhagvãn, 
whatever  misery  he  suffers  is  due  to  the  negligence  in  following 
Bhagvãn’s  ãgnã for   the   sake   of   worthless   objects.      Whatever 
happiness  he  does  experience,  is  a  result  of  following  the ãgnã of 
Bhagvãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 34 || 34 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 35 
Krodh, Mãn, Irshyã, And Kapat Leads To A Demonic Intellect 
 
35.1
 In the Samvat year 1876, on Posh vad 12 [12
th
 January, 1820], Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  facing  east  on  a  decorated 
bedstead   under   the   neem   tree   in   front   of   the mandir of Shree 
Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was 
dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
35.2
 Addressing  the munis, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Either you ask me a 
question, or I shall ask you a question.” 
 
35.3
 The munis said, “Mahãrãj, please ask.” 
 
35.4
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Suppose there is a person who does not 
falter  when  it  comes  to  protecting  his  own kalyãn,  despite  having 
little intelligence.  On the other hand, there is another person who is 
very intelligent – to the extent that he can point out mistakes even in 
great men.  But, he does not walk on the path of kalyãn.  What is the 
reason for this?” 
 
35.5
 The munis attempted   to   answer,   but   as   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   raised 
doubts, they were unable to provide a precise answer. 
 
35.6
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then said, “Allow me to answer.  Such a person may 
be highly intelligent, but his intelligence is polluted.  As a result, he is 

GADHADÃ I 
- 92 - 
unable to walk on the path of kalyãn.  For example, suppose there is 
some  sweet,  tasty  buffalo-milk.  If a snake’s venom were to fall  in  it, 
then that milk and sugar would become poisonous.  Whoever drinks 
it,  would  die.    Similarly,  such  a  person  may  be  highly  intelligent,  but 
he  has  identified avgun in  a  great sant or Bhagvãn.    The avgun that 
has entered his mind is equivalent to the snake’s venom.  So, how can 
he possibly walk on the path of kalyãn?  In fact, even if someone were 
to listen to his talks, the listener’s mind would also fall back from 
satsang.  
 
35.7
 “A  person  possessing  such  a  polluted  intelligence  in  this  way, 
perceives avgun in Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas,  wherever  he  takes 
birth.    On  the  other  hand,  a  person  who  does  not  have  a  polluted 
intelligence,  but  has  little  intelligence,  does  not  falter  in  protecting 
his kalyãn.” 
 
35.8
 Muktãnand Swãmi then asked, “Mahãrãj, can a person with such a 
polluted intellect ever turn towards Bhagvãn?” 
 
35.9
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “No, he never turns towards Bhagvãn.” 
 
35.10
 Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, please tell us how we can avoid 
developing such a demonic intellect.” 
 
35.11
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “If a person does not keep the following 
four svabhãvs with Bhagvãn and His sant, then his intellect will never 
become  demonic: krodh, mãn, irshyã, kapat.    If  he  keeps  even  one  of 
these  four,  then  his  intellect  will  become  demonic,  just  like  Jay  and 
Vijay.    Despite  being  wise,  their  intellect  became  demonic,  because 
they  showed mãn towards  the Sanakãdik.    As  a  result,  they  both  fell 
from Vaikunth. 
 
35.12
 “Furthermore, when a person’s intellect  becomes  demonic,  even  the 
gun of Bhagvãn and  His bhakta appear  as  faults  to  him.    Wherever 

GADHADÃ I 
- 93 - 
such  a  person  takes  birth,  he  becomes  an  attendant  of Shiv or  the 
king of demons, and does bhajan of Bhagvãn with hatred.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 35 || 35 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 36 
A Tyãgi Must Only Have Love For Bhagvãn 
 
36.1
 In the Samvat year 1876, on Posh vad 13 [13
th
 January, 1820], Shreeji 
Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on  the  platform  under 
the  neem  tree  in  front  of  the mandir of Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in 
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was dressed entirely in white 
clothes, with garlands of white and yellow flowers adorning His neck.  
Bunches  of  white  flowers  were  placed  on  both  of  His  ears,  and  a 
tassel of yellow flowers was hanging from His pãgh.  A chhoglu made 
from red karnikãr flowers had also been placed in His pãgh.  Also, He 
was playing with a ball of white flowers with His right hand.  To the 
joy  of  His bhaktas,  He  was  sitting  in  a  charming  fashion.    A sabhã of 
munis,  as  well as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before Him. 
 
36.2
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “How should a person view a person who 
has  abandoned  worldly  life  and  accepted  the  clothing  of  a tyãgi,  yet 
still has affection for useless objects?  He should be viewed to be like 
a  poor  person  beside  a  wealthy  person.    Suppose  there  is  a  poor 
person  who  has  no  clothes  to  wear  and  feeds  himself  by  scavenging 
for  scraps  of  food  from  piles  of  waste,  not  only  does  he  consider 
himself to be a sinner, but other wealthy people also consider him to 
be a sinner.  They presume, ‘He must have committed many sins, which 
is why he has no food or clothes’. 
 
36.3
 “Similarly, after becoming a tyãgi, a person who collects nice clothes 
and  other  pleasant  objects  with  a  strong  craving  for  them,  but  does 

GADHADÃ I 
- 94 - 
not   have   affection   for dharma, gnãn, vairãgya,   and bhakti,   is 
considered by the great ekãntik sant to be a sinner just like the poor 
person.    As  he  is  a  sinner,  he  does  not  have  love  for dharma, gnãn, 
vairãgya, and bhakti.  Instead, he has affection for objects other than 
Bhagvãn. 
 
36.4
 “However, for a true tyãgi both dirt and gold are equal.  Also, a tyãgi 
never makes distinctions by thinking, ‘This object is pleasant, and this 
object is unpleasant’.    He  never  has  such  an  understanding.    Instead, 
he  has  love  only  towards Bhagvãn.    Only  such  a  person  is  a  true 
tyãgi.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 36 || 36 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 37 
Detachment From Birthplace And Relatives 
 
37.1
 In the Samvat year 1876, on Posh vad 14 [14
th
 January, 1820], Shreeji 
Mahãrãj  was  sitting  facing  west  on  a  decorated  bedstead  under  the 
neem  tree  in  front  of  the mandir of Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in  Dãdã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  wearing  a  white pãgh,  from 
which hung a tassel of yellow flowers.  Bunches of white flowers had 
also  been  placed  upon  both  of  His  ears,  and  a  garland  of  yellow  and 
white  flowers  adorned  His  neck.    He  had  covered  Himself  with  a 
white chãdar,  and  was  wearing  a  white khes.   A sabhã of munis,  as 
well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
37.2
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “A  person  who  lacks  understanding 
cannot  abandon  his  feelings  of  affection  for  his  birthplace  even 
though  he  has  abandoned  the  world.”    So  saying,  He  showed 
everyone  the  scar  on  His  thigh  where  He  had  been  injured  by  the 
broken branch  of  a  tree  during  His  childhood.    Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then 
continued, “Whenever I see this scar, I remember the tree and the 
lake.  Therefore, it is extremely difficult to forget your birthplace and 

GADHADÃ I 
- 95 - 
relatives.    I  would  like  those  amongst  you,  who  do  not remember 
your  birthplace  and  relations,  to  confess.    For  those  of  you,  who  do 
not speak up out of shame, take oath on the name of Nar-Nãrãyan.” 
 
37.3
 Then, all the munis revealed what was true for them. 
 
37.4
 After  listening  to  them,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said, “If a person believes 
himself  to  be  the ãtmã,  where  is  the  birthplace  of  that ãtmã?    Who 
are   the   relatives   of   that ãtmã?      Of   what   gender   is   that ãtmã?  
Moreover,  if  you  wish  to  maintain  relationships  with  your  relatives, 
then you should also maintain relationships with all the relatives that 
you  have  had  throughout  your  previous  lives  in  the  cycle  of  8.4 
million life-forms.    Furthermore, if  a  person  wishes  for  the kalyãn of 
his  relatives,  then  he  should  wish  the  same  for  all.    However,  just  as 
upon  beginning  this  human  life  the  parents  of  the  previous  8.4 
million  life-forms  have  all  been  forgotten  due  to ignorance,  similarly 
the   parents   of   this   human   body   should   be   forgotten   through 
knowledge. 
 
37.5
 “As  for  me,  I  have  no  affection  towards  any  of  my  relatives.  
Moreover,  a  person  may  be  serving  me,  but  if  there  is  no bhakti for 
Bhagvãn in his heart, I cannot develop a liking for him – even if I try.  
Even if he is as virtuous as Nãradji, if he lacks bhakti for Bhagvãn, I do 
not like him.   
 
37.6
 “On the other hand, there is a person who has bhakti for Bhagvãn in 
his heart.  He understands that the way in which pratyaksha Bhagvãn 
resides  on  this  earth,  and  the  way  in  which  the bhakta of Bhagvãn 
remains in the vicinity of Bhagvãn, is exactly how they remain when 
ãtyantik-pralay occurs.    He  also  understands  that Bhagvãn and  His 
bhakta is  eternally sãkãr,  but  never  does  he  understand  them  to  be 
nirãkãr, regardless of any Vedãnt shãstra he may hear.  Furthermore, 
he  realises  that  no  one  besides Bhagvãn sustains  the  world,  and  he 
also realises that without Bhagvãn, even a dry leaf cannot be stirred. 
 

GADHADÃ I 
- 96 - 
37.7
 “A  person with  such  firm  belief  that Bhagvãn is sãkãr,  even  an 
ordinary person, is still dear to me.  Kãl, karma, and Mãyã are unable 
to  use  their  power  over  him.    In  fact, Bhagvãn Himself  instructs  any 
punishment  that  he  is  to  receive,  but  no  one  else  has  any  authority 
over him.  On the other hand, I have no respect for a person without 
such  a  belief,  even  if  he  happens  to  have  the  qualities of tyãg and 
vairãgya.  However, a person with firm belief in Bhagvãn in his heart 
never   loses   his   belief   that Bhagvãn is sãkãr,   nor   does   he   ever 
understand Bhagvãn to  be nirãkãr like  a  mass  of  light,  regardless  of 
how many shãstras he may hear or the company he may keep.  A sant 
with  such  a  belief  is  so  highly  respected  by  me  that  even  I  place  the 
dust on his holy feet on my head.  In my mind, I am afraid of harming 
him, and I also long to have his darshan. 
 
37.8
 “A person without this belief attempts to attain kalyãn using  the 
strength of his own spiritual activities, but he does not strive for it by 
relying on the grace of Bhagvãn.  Such a senseless person is as foolish 
as  someone  wishing  to  cross  the  ocean  without  the  aid  of  a  ship,  by 
his own efforts.  Conversely, a person who wishes for kalyãn through 
the  grace  of Bhagvãn is  wise,  like  a  person  who  wishes  to  cross  the 
ocean with the help of a ship. 
 
37.9
 “After leaving their body, all those with such knowledge of Bhagvãn’s 
svarup attain  a murti of chaitanya in  the  home  of Bhagvãn and 
forever  remain  in  His sevã in  His  presence.    But  if  a  person  has 
attempted  to  attain kalyãn without having such  a belief,  then  he  will 
go to dwell in the loks of other devs. 
 
37.10
 “In fact, the darshan of such a true bhakta of Bhagvãn is equivalent to 
the darshan of Bhagvãn Himself.  He is so great that his darshan alone 
can redeem countless wretched jeevs.” 
37.11
 Having delivered these talks, Shreeji Mahãrãj requested, “Now please 
sing a kirtan.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 37 || 37 || 

GADHADÃ I 
- 97 - 
Gadhadã I – 38 
Remove Vãsnã Before You Perform Bhakti 
   
38.1
 In the Samvat year 1876, on the evening of Mahã sud 1 [16
th
 January, 
1820],  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  small  mattress  which  had 
been placed on the veranda outside the stables in Dãdã Khãchar’s 
darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  wearing  a  white khes and  had  tied  a 
white,  red-bordered feto around  His  head.    He  was  also wearing  a 
richly  embroidered angarkhu and  had  covered  Himself  with  a  white 
chofãl.  A sabhã of sãdhus, as well as haribhaktas from various places, 
had gathered before Him. 
 
38.2
 After  glancing  at  all  the haribhaktas,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  thought  for 
some time and then said, “Please listen, as I have something to say.” 
 
38.3
 He then continued, “From the time a satsangi enters  the satsang,  he 
should  examine  his  mind  by  thinking ‘In the first year, my mind was 
like  this,  then  it  was  like  this.    Previously,  I  had  this  much  desire  for 
Bhagvãn and this much desire for the world’.    In  this  way,  he  should 
repeatedly reflect on his yearly total of desires and always attempt to 
gradually, yet constantly eradicate all worldly desires that remain in 
the  mind.    However,  if  he does  not  assess  himself  constantly,  and 
allows   those   desires   to   accumulate,   then   they   will   never   be 
overcome.      Consider   the   analogy   of  opening   an   account   with   a 
merchant:  If a person settles the debts regularly on a monthly basis, 
then it will not be difficult to repay the debt.  But, if he waits until the 
end  of  the  year  to  repay  the  debt,  it  will  be  extremely  difficult  to 
settle   the   account.      Likewise,   a   person   should   assess   himself 
constantly. 
 
38.4
 “In reality, the mind is saturated with desires for the  world.    In  the 
way  that  sesame  seeds  are  permeated  with  scent  by  padding  them 
between  alternating  layers  of  flowers,  the  mind  should  be  saturated 
with  flowers  in  the  form  of  the  constant  remembrance  of Bhagvãn’s 

GADHADÃ I 
- 98 - 
charitra,  together  with  an  understanding of  His  greatness.    These 
charitras and  thoughts  of Bhagvãn should  be  entangled  within  the 
mind.  As one thought subsides, another should be visualised.  In this 
way, the mind should not be left idle.”  Saying this, Shreeji Mahãrãj 
narrated a story of a ghost.” 
 
38.5
 He then continued, “Even if a person begins to recall the charitras, 
talks, and darshan of Bhagvãn of just one day, there would be no end 
to  them.    If  that  is  so,  then  there  would  certainly  be  no  end  to  them 
for someone who has passed ten to fifteen years in satsang. 
 
38.6
 “These charitras should be recalled in the following way: ‘In this way, 
Mahãrãj and the paramhans held sabhã in this village; in this way, pujã 
was offered to Mahãrãj; in this way, talks were done’.  Those charitras 
of Bhagvãn should  be  recalled  over  and  over  again.    Moreover,  for  a 
person  who  does  not  have  much  understanding,  this  is  certainly  the 
best method for them.  In fact, there is no other method like it. 
 
38.7
 “Then, you may say, ‘We wish to take very little food and wish to keep 
many fasts’.  But, I do not emphasise those methods.  A person should 
abide  by  those  methods  as  best  as  he  can  in  accordance  with  his 
given niyams.    But,  what  I  have  just  described  to  you  is  what  should 
truly be done.” 
 
38.8
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “I believe that the mind should be free of 
worldly  desires.    No  matter  how  much pravrutti a  person  may  do 
physically,  if  his  mind is pure,  then  he cannot  be seriously harmed – 
even  though  outwardly,  in  society,  a  person  engaged in pravrutti 
appears to be dishonourable.  On the other hand, if a person’s mind is 
full   of   worldly   desires   and   he   superficially   behaves   as   if   he   is 
practicing nivrutti, then he may appear respectable in society, but his 
jeev will  suffer  severely.    This  is because  at  the  time  of  death,  it  is 
those thoughts that are in a person’s mind that spring forth, just like 
the child of a deer sprang forth in Bharatji’s mind during his last 

GADHADÃ I 
- 99 - 
moments.  As a result, he became a deer in his next life, even though 
he had originally given up a kingdom and Rushabh-Dev Bhagvãn was 
his  father.    Therefore,  to  remain  mentally  free  of  worldly  desires  is 
my  belief.    By  keeping  fasts,  the mind  does  become  weak  along  with 
the  body;  but,  when  the  body  becomes  strong  again,  the  mind  also 
becomes  strong.    Therefore,  mental tyãg is  required  along  with 
physical tyãg.    In  fact,  a  person  whose  mind  holds  thoughts  of 
Bhagvãn but not thoughts relating to the world should be considered 
important  in  our satsang.    Conversely,  those  who  do  not  do  this  are 
inferior. 
 
38.9
 “Furthermore,  a grahastha should   engage   in   worldly   activities 
physically,   but   mentally   he   should   also   remain   free   of   worldly 
desires,  just  like  the tyãgi,  and  should  think  of Bhagvãn.    Also,  he 
should  engage  in  social  activities  according  to  the ãgnã of Bhagvãn.  
Moreover, if mental tyãg is not genuine, then what about Janak Rãjã, 
whose  mind  was  like  that  of  a  great yogi  master,  despite  ruling  a 
kingdom?    Therefore,  only tyãg which  is  developed  mentally,  is 
appropriate.” 
 
38.10
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  explained,  “If  impure  thoughts  arise  in  a 
person’s mind, he should reveal them.  But, as the saying goes, ‘Only a 
dog will lick a dog’s face’, or ‘When a snake is a guest to another snake, 
the  host-snake  will  have  nothing  to  offer,  so  the  guest-snake lick’s the 
host-snake’s face’,  or  when  a  married  woman  goes  to  a  widow,  the 
widow says, ‘Come, lady.  May you also become like me’.   Similarly,  to 
reveal  impure  thoughts  to  someone  who  also  experiences  impure 
thoughts is like the examples mentioned. 
 
38.11
 “Then, to whom should a person reveal his impure thoughts?  Well, 
he  should  reveal  them  to  a  person  who  is  so  strong-willed,  that  no 
impure  thoughts  relating  to  the  world  arise  in  his  mind.    However, 
there may be many who do not experience such thoughts.  So, out of 
those,  a  person  should  reveal  his  impure  thoughts  to  a  person  who 

GADHADÃ I 
- 100 - 
criticises those thoughts after listening to them and who continues to 
criticise  them  in  all  of  his  activities – while  eating,  drinking,  sitting, 
standing – until  they are  eradicated  from  his  mind.    Moreover,  that 
person  should have the  same  determination  to  eradicate  others’ 
impure  thoughts  as  he  has  to  remove  his  own.    A  person  should 
reveal  his  impure  thoughts  to  such  a  person.    But,  if  the  person  to 
whom  he  reveals his  impure  thoughts  does  not  give  advice  in  this 
way  and  is  himself  careless,  then  what  can  someone  gain  from  him?  
Therefore,    after    revealing    impure    thoughts    in    this    way    and 
eradicating them, a person should continuously hold thoughts only of 
Bhagvãn and become  free  from  all  desires  for  the  pleasures  of  the 
world.” 
 
38.12
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “What are the characteristics of keeping a 
fast  on  a  day  of Ekãdashi?    Well,  the  ten indriyas and  the  mind,  the 
eleventh,  should  be  withdrawn  from  their  respective vishays and 
attached  to Bhagvãn.   That  is considered as  having  kept  an Ekãdashi 
fast.    In  fact, bhaktas of Bhagvãn should  engage  in  this  continuously.  
In  comparison,  if  a  person  whose mind  is  not  free  from  worldly 
desires  in  this  way  physically  engages  in vrat and tap,  he  does  not 
benefit   very   much.      Therefore,   following   his   own dharma and 
understanding Bhagvãn’s greatness,   a bhakta of Bhagvãn should 
maintain a constant effort to free his mind of worldly desires.” 
 
38.13
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then explained, “A true tyãgi is a person whose mind 
never  thinks about  a  desire  for  objects  that  he  has  already  given  up.  
Just  as  a  person  has  no  desire  for  faeces  once  they  have  been 
excreted,  in  the  same  way,  no  desire  arises  for  rejected  objects.  
Nãradji narrated to Shukji: 
 
tyaja dharmama-dharma cha 
 
The essence of the shlok is: ‘A person should abandon all objects except 
the ãtmã; he should behave only as the ãtmã and worship Bhagvãn’.  
Such a  person  can  be called  a perfect tyãgi.   Furthermore, grahastha 

GADHADÃ I 
- 101 - 
haribhaktas should  behave  like  Janak  Rãjã,  who  said, ‘Although my 
city of Mithilã is burning, nothing of mine is burning’,  as stated  in  the 
following shlok:  
 
mithilãyãm pradeep-tãyam na me dahyati kinchana 
 
A grahastha haribhakta with this type of understanding, even though 
he  may  possess  a  house,  is  a  true haribhakta.    A  person  who  is  not 
such  a tyãgi or grahastha is  called  a  false bhakta,  whereas  a  person 
who  behaves  as  described  above  should  be  known  as  an ekãntik 
bhakta.” 
 
38.14
 Then, Motã Ãtmãnand Swãmi asked Shreeji Mahãrãj, “What are the 
characteristics  of  the jeevãtmã,  which  is  distinct  from  the  body,  the 
indriyas, the antah-karans, and their presiding devs?” 
 
38.15
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “I shall answer that question in brief.  The 
jeev is  the  speaker  that  explains  the  nature  of  the  body  and  the 
indriyas,  and  explains  their  natures  separately  to  the  listener.    That 
speaker is the knower of everything, and is distinct from all the above 
– that  is  called  the jeev.    Also,  the  listener,  which  understands  the 
forms  of  the  body  and  the indriyas as  being  distinct,  which  knows 
them,  and  which  is  distinct  from  them  all,  is  also  known  as  the jeev 
itself.    This  is  the  method  of  understanding  the  nature  of  the jeev.”  
Shreeji Mahãrãj spoke in this way. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 38 || 38 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 39 
Nirvikalp Or Savikalp Samãdhi 
 
39.1
 In the Samvat year 1876, on Mahã sud 3 [18
th
 January, 1820], Shreeji 
Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on  the  platform  under 
the  neem  tree  in  front  of  the mandir of Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in 
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was wearing a white khes and 

GADHADÃ I 
- 102 - 
had  covered  Himself  with  a  white chãdar.    He  had tied  a  white pãgh 
around His head, from which tassels of yellow flowers were dangling.  
Bunches of white and yellow flowers had been placed above His ears, 
and  He  was  wearing  garlands  of  yellow  flowers  around  His  neck.    A 
sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had 
gathered before Him. 
 
39.2
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then asked a question to a vedãnti brãhman who was 
sitting in the sabhã, “You claim that only Brahm exists.  Furthermore, 
you  say  that with  the  exception  of  that Brahm, jeevs, ishvars, Mãyã, 
the  world,  the  Veds,  six-shãstras,  and  the  Purãns,  are  all  false.    I  can 
neither   understand   this   concept   of   yours,   nor   can   I   accept   it.  
Therefore, please answer what I ask you, and do so by citing only the 
Veds,  the  six-shãstras,  the  Purãns,  the  Smrutis,  or  other  historical 
shãstras.      However,   if   you   reply   quoting   the   words   of   some 
inauthentic shãstra,  then  I  will  not  accept  your  answer.    But,  since  I 
have absolute faith in the words of Vyãsji, I will be able to accept your 
answer if you reply quoting his words.” 
 
39.3
 The vedãnti then attempted to reply using various arguments, but as 
Shreeji    Mahãrãj    had    raised    doubts,    the    question    remained 
unanswered. 
 
39.4
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Please listen as  I  answer  that  question 
myself.    There  are  two  different  states  of  those  who  have  become 
muktas by worshipping Bhagvãn.  For example, a person standing on 
top  of  Mount  Meru  clearly  sees  everything  in  the  vicinity  of  Meru – 
the  other  mountains,  trees,  as well  as  the  ground  that  supports  the 
mountains  and  the  trees.    Similarly,  those  enlightened muktas  who 
have  attained savikalp samãdhi,  see jeevs, ishvars, Mãyã,  and  their 
supporter  (Brahm),  as  being  separate  from  each  other.    A  person 
standing on top of Mount Lokã-Lok, sees everything in the vicinity of 
Mount  Lokã-Lok,  but  sees  the  other  mountains  and  trees,  as  being 
one  with  the  ground.    He  does  not  see  them  as  being  separate.  

GADHADÃ I 
- 103 - 
Similarly,  those  great muktas  who  have  attained nirvikalp samãdhi 
see jeevs, ishvars,  and Mãyã as Brahm,  but  they  do  not  see  them  as 
separate entities. 
 
39.5
 “In this way, there are two differing states of muktas, and it is due to 
their  differing  states  that  everything  is  viewed  as  being  either satya 
or asatya.    The  words  of  those  who  have  attained  the savikalp state 
are  noted  in  the  Veds,  the  six-shãstras,  and  the  Purãns,  and  they 
describe  all  of  those  entities  as  being satya.    However,  the  words  of 
those  who  have  attained  the nirvikalp state  describe  all  of  those 
entities  as asatya.    In  reality,  they  are  not asatya.    They  are  only 
described  as  being asatya because  they  cannot  be  seen  due  to  the 
influence of the nirvikalp state. 
 
39.6
 “For example, there is no night for a person sitting in the chariot of 
Surya.  But, for those on earth, there is both day and night.  Similarly, 
from  the  viewpoint  of  a  person  who  has  attained  the nirvikalp state, 
all the things do not exist, whereas according to others, they do exist.  
So, if a person interprets ‘Brahm’ in this way, then there will never be 
any  irregularities  in  the  statements  of  the shãstras.    But,  if  a person 
does  not,  then  irregularities  will  arise.    Furthermore,  if  a  person – 
without having understood these inconsistencies and without having 
attained that nirvikalp state, relying solely on words learned from the 
shãstras – promotes  the  existence  of Brahm alone,  claiming  that  the 
guru, the shishya, jeevs, ishvars, Mãyã, the world, the Veds, the Purãns, 
and  the shãstras, are  all  imaginary,  then  he  is  extremely  foolish.  
Ultimately, such a person will be sent to Narak.” 
 
39.7
 Having  answered  the  question,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  ended  by  asking  the 
brãhman, “Now, if you have any doubts in what I have just said, 
please say so.” 
 
39.8
 Then,  the vedãnti  brãhman replied, “O Mahãrãj, O Prabhu, O Swãmi!  
You are Bhagvãn, and you have incarnated for the kalyãn of the entire 
world.  The explanation you have given is of course precise.  There is 

GADHADÃ I 
- 104 - 
no room for any doubt.”  So saying, he became extremely pleased, and 
after  abandoning  his  misconceptions,  he  became  an ãshrit of  Shreeji 
Mahãrãj. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 39 || 39 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 40 
The Characteristics Of Bhakti And Upãsanã 
 
40.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  in  the  early  hours  of Mahã  sud 4  [19
th
 
January,  1820],  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead 
under the neem tree in front of the mandir of Shree Vãsudev-Nãrãyan 
in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  wearing  a  white khes 
and  had  covered  Himself  with  a  white chãdar.    He  had tied  a  white 
pãgh around His head, with a tassel of yellow flowers hanging from it.  
He  was  wearing  a  garland  of  yellow  flowers  around  His  neck.    A 
sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had 
gathered before Him. 
 
40.2
 Muktãnand  Swãmi  then asked Shreeji Mahãrãj, “What is savikalp 
samãdhi, and what is nirvikalp samãdhi?” 
 
40.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “If a person who has sthiti in the svarup of 
Bhagvãn does not have any impure desires, but does have some pure 
desires.  For example, ‘I wish to become like Nãrad, the Sanakãdik and 
Shukji’, or ‘I wish to go to the ãshram of Nar-Nãrãyan and stay with the 
munis there to perform tap’, or ‘I wish to go to Shvet-Dvip and become 
like a mukta of Shvet-Dvip by performing tap’ – then such a person is 
said to be in savikalp samãdhi.  On the other hand, a person who does 
not  have  such  thoughts,  has  attained  the  characteristics  of Akshar-
Brahm, and remains engaged only in the murti of Bhagvãn, is said to 
be in nirvikalp samãdhi.” 
 
40.4
 Then,  Muktãnand  Swãmi  asked  again,  “Mahãrãj,  what  is  the 
difference between bhakti and upãsanã?” 
 

GADHADÃ I 
- 105 - 
40.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied: 
 
shravanam kirtanam vishnoha smaranam pãd-sevanam 
archanam vandanam dãsyam sakhyam ãtma-nivedanam 
Nine ways of offering bhakti to Bhagvãn: shravan, kirtan, smaran , pãd sevan, 
archan, vandan, dãsya, sakhya, ãtma-nivedan. 
 
“To worship Bhagvãn in these nine ways is known as bhakti. 
 
40.6
 “Upãsanã can be defined as having a firm belief that Bhagvãn’s svarup 
is sãkãr.    Even  if  a  person becomes brahm-rup,  that  belief  never 
disappears.    Moreover,  even  if  he  happens  to  listen  to shãstras 
proposing    the    view    that Bhagvãn is nirãkãr,    he    would    still 
understand Bhagvãn to  always  be sãkãr.    Regardless  of  what  is 
mentioned  in  the shãstras,  he  would  only  promote Bhagvãn’s svarup 
as sãkãr, never allowing his own upãsanã to be disproved.  A person 
who   has   such   a   firm   understanding   is   considered   to   possess 
upãsanã.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 40 || 40 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 41 
Purushottam Bhagvãn Resides In All 
 
41.1
 In the Samvat year 1876, on the evening of Mahã sud 5 [20
th
 January, 
1820],  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on  the 
platform  under  the  neem  tree  near  the mandir of Shree  Vãsudev-
Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed 
entirely  in  white  clothes.    He  was  also  wearing  garland  of  yellow 
flowers.    Bunches  of  yellow  flowers  had  been  placed  above  His  ears, 
and  tassels  of  yellow  flowers  were  dangling  from  His pãgh.    A sabhã 
of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before Him. 
 
41.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Please engage in a question-answer 
discussion.” 

GADHADÃ I 
- 106 - 
41.3
 Nrusinhãnand Swãmi then said, 
 
ekoham bahu shyãm prajãyeya 
 
  “Many pandits and vedãntis in the world interpret this Vedic shlok to 
mean: ‘The one Bhagvãn present at the time of destruction, Himself 
takes the form of all jeevs and ishvars by His own will’.  But this belief 
can  only  be  accepted  by  someone  who  is  a  fool.    We  have  accepted 
your  refuge,  so  this  belief  does  not make  sense  in  our  minds.    Our 
understanding is that Bhagvãn is achyut, and that he does not divide 
and  assume  the svarups of  various jeevs and ishvars.    Therefore,  we 
can only fully understand the meaning of this shlok if you explain it to 
us.” 
 
41.4
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then explained, “The meaning of that Vedic shlok is 
not  as  they  interpret  it  to  be.    In  fact,  it  has  a  different  meaning 
altogether.  In the Ved-Stuti, it is stated:  
 
svakruta-vichitra-yonishu  vishan-niva hetutayã 
taratam-tash-cha-kãstyanala-vatsva krutãnu-krutihi 
 
This  means: ‘Purushottam Bhagvãn creates and enters the various 
types of life-forms as their cause, He is antaryãmi, and He inspires them 
to a greater or lesser degree’. 
 
41.5
 “More specifically, at the time of creation, Purushottam Bhagvãn, who 
is  greater  than  even Akshar,  looks  towards Akshar.    As  a  result, 
Purush incarnates  from Akshar.    After  entering Akshar, Purushottam 
enters Purush,  and  in  the  form  of Purush,  inspires Prakruti.    In  this 
way,  as Purushottam successively  entered the  various  entities,  the 
activities   of   creation   took   place.      Then, Pradhãn-Purush were 
produced  from Prakruti-Purush.    From Pradhãn-Purush, maha-tattva 
was  produced.    From maha-tattva,  the  three  types  of ahankãr were 
produced.    From ahankãr,  the bhuts,  the vishays,  the indriyas,  the 
antah-karans,  and  their  presiding devs were  produced.    From  those, 

GADHADÃ I 
- 107 - 
Virãt-Purush was  produced,  and  from  the  lotus  extending  from  his 
naval, Brahmã was  produced.    From  that Brahmã, Marichi  and  other 
prajãpatis were  produced.    From  them, Indra and  other devs,  the 
demons, and all the sthãvar and jangam creatures were produced. 
 
41.6
 “Purushottam Bhagvãn enters  and  dwells  in  all  the  above  as  their 
cause,  and  is antaryãmi.    However,  He  does  not  reside  in Prakruti-
Purush to the extent that He resides in Akshar.  He does not reside in 
Pradhãn-Purush to the extent that He resides in Prakruti-Purush.  He 
does not reside in maha-tattva and the rest of the twenty-four tattvas 
to  the  extent  that  He  resides  in Pradhãn-Purush.    He  does  not  reside 
in Virãt-Purush to  the  extent  that  He  resides  in  the  twenty-four 
tattvas.  He does not reside in Brahmã to the extent that He resides in 
Virãt-Purush.    He  does  not  reside  in  those  like  Marichi  to  the  extent 
that  He  resides  in Brahmã.  He  does  not  reside  in  Kashyap  to  the 
extent that He resides in Marichi.  He does not reside in Indra and the 
other devs to  the  extent  that  He  resides  in  Kashyap.    He  does  not 
reside in human beings to the extent that He resides in Indra and the 
other devs.  He does not reside in animals and birds to the extent that 
He  resides  in  human  beings.    In  this  way, Purushottam Bhagvãn 
resides  in  all – to  a  greater  or  lesser  degree – as  their  cause,  and  is 
antaryãmi. 
 
41.7
 “For example, fire resides within wood.  Large  fire  resides  in  large 
pieces of wood, long fire resides in a long piece of wood, and bent fire 
resides  in  a  bent  piece  of  wood.    In  a  similar  way, Purushottam 
Bhagvãn resides  in  various  entities  with  varying  degrees  of  power 
according to the task to be accomplished through that entity.  
 
41.8
 “Purushottam Bhagvãn also resides in those like Akshar and Prakruti-
Purush,  and  is antaryãmi.    However,  because  of  the  difference  in  the 
abilities  of  those  entities,  there  is  a  difference  in  their  power.    So, 
there  is  only  one Purushottam Bhagvãn,  and  it  is  He  who  enters  all 
and resides in them as antaryãmi.  But, He Himself does not become 

GADHADÃ I 
- 108 - 
the jeevs and ishvars by  assuming  many svarups.    This  is  how  that 
Vedic shlok should be interpreted.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 41 || 41 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 42 
Vidhi And Nishedh 
 
42.1
 In the Samvat year 1876, on Mahã sud 6 [21
st
 January, 1820], Shreeji 
Mahãrãj  was  sitting  facing  west  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on  the 
platform under the neem tree in front of the mandir of Shree Vãsudev-
Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  had  tied  a  white 
pãgh around  His  head.    He  had  also  covered  Himself  with  a  white 
chãdar and was wearing a white khes.  Bunches of yellow flowers had 
been  placed  above  both  of  His  ears.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
42.2
 Seated  in  the sabhã,  were  some vedãnti  brãhmans.    Seeing  them, 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “Those  who  study  or  listen  to  the Vedãnt 
shãstras claim, ‘The vidhi and nishedh are false; Svarg and Narak, 
which are attained by following them, are also false; the disciples who 
attain  them  are  false;  and  the  guru  is  false  as  well.    Brahm  pervades 
everything and it alone is satya’.    But,  those  who  speak  in  this  way, 
with what understanding do they propose this? 
42.3
 “In actual fact, the ãchãrya of  all vedãntis,  Shankar-Ãchãrya,  had  his 
own  disciples  keep  a  cane  and  a kamandalu.  He also enforced, ‘A 
person should recite the Bhagvad Geetã and the Vishnu-Sahasranãm; a 
person should perform pujã of Vishnu; those who are young should bow 
down to those who are senior in age; and a person should beg for alms 
only from the house of a religious and pure brãhman’.    So,  because 
Shankar-Ãchãrya proposed the following of various vidhi and nishedh 
in this way, can you claim that he did not have complete gnãn?  Have 
those who claim to have recently attained gnãn, and have falsified the 
following  of  these vidhi and nishedh,  become  greater  than  Shankar-

GADHADÃ I 
- 109 - 
Ãchãrya?    Actually,  it  seems  as  if  they  are  speaking  out  of  absolute 
foolishness. 
 
42.4
 “In reality, those vidhi and nishedh that  have  been  falsified  in  the 
shãstras, can be understood through the following example:  If a large 
ship  sets  out  to  sea  for  a  year,  then  neither  the  shoreline  ahead  nor 
the  shoreline  behind  can  be  seen.    In  fact,  even  huge  mountains  on 
either shoreline cannot be seen, so how can trees or people possibly 
be  seen?    Wherever  a  person  looks,  only  water  can  be  seen;  but 
besides  water,  nothing  else  is  visible.    If  he  looks  up,  the  enormous 
waves of the ocean rising up will be seen.  So even above, only water 
is visible.  In this situation, people sitting in the ship would claim that 
there is only water, and nothing else exists.  The principle behind this 
example  is  that  a  person  who  has  attained  a nirvikalp state  in  the 
form  of Brahm claims, ‘There is only Brahm; besides that everything 
else, such as jeevs, ishvars, and Mãyã, is false’.  Hearing words written 
in  the shãstras supporting  this  view,  a  person  who  has  not  even 
attained that state, claims all vidhi and nishedh are false.  He thinks of 
his  wife  and  children,  and  carries  out  all  social  activities  while 
believing  them  to  be  true.    Therefore,  he  believes  the vidhi and 
nishedh,  which  are  written  in  the shãstras,  to  be  false.    Those  who 
preach such gnãn in this world should be known as extremely sinful 
and nãstiks. 
 
42.5
 “After all, it was because  of  the  uneasiness  that  such  a nãstik nature 
may  creep  into  people’s  hearts,  that  Shankar-Ãchãrya  composed 
many shloks in the praise of Vishnu, such as:  
 
bhaja govindam bhaja govindam govindam bhaja mudhamate 
O fool!  Worship Bhagvãn...Worship Bhagvãn...Worship Bhagvãn. 
 
“He also composed several shloks praising Shivji, Ganpati, Surya,  and 
many other devs.  After hearing these shloks, all the devs appear to be 
satya.    It  was  with  this  intention  in  mind  that  Shankar-Ãchãrya 
composed shloks in  praise  of  all these devs.    Despite  this,  scholars  of 

GADHADÃ I 
- 110 - 
today falsify them.  In addition, they claim, ‘Regardless of how severe a 
sin a person with gnãn may commit, it would not affect him’.  But, they 
say this out of foolishness. 
 
42.6
 “Also, consider this: From all those tyãgi paramhans, Jadbharat is the 
best.    In  fact,  the  story  of  Jadbharat  has  been  noted  in  each  of  the 
Purãns and all the Vedãnt shãstras.  That great Jadbharat was also the 
son  of Rushabh-Dev Bhagvãn in  his  previous  life.    He  gave  up  his 
kingdom,   and   went   to   live   in   the   forest.      There,   he   developed 
affection  for  a  deer.    Although  that  was  merely  out  of  compassion, 
this  mistake  caused  him  to  be  reborn  as  a  deer.    Like  that  deer,  he 
attained four legs, a short tail, and small horns on his head. 
 
42.7
 “In comparison, the gopis of Vraj were  attached  to Shree  Krishna 
Bhagvãn out  of  lust.    Despite  this,  they  were  still  able  to  overcome 
Bhagvãn’s mãyã,  and  attain  the nirgun Akshardhãm of Bhagvãn after 
becoming gunãtit.      The   reason   for   this   was   that Shree   Krishna 
Bhagvãn was Purushottam,  and  He  was  a gunãtit  divya murti.    So, 
because   the gopis developed   love   for   Him,   either   knowingly   or 
unknowingly,   they   became gunãtit as   well.      However,   Bharatji 
became a deer because he had developed affection for the deer out of 
compassion.    Therefore,  no  matter  how  great  a  person  may  be, 
kusang only  leads  to  harm.    Conversely,  regardless  of  how  great  a 
sinner  a  person  may  be,  if  he  maintains  profound  association with 
Bhagvãn,  who  is satya,  then  that  person  also  becomes  absolutely 
pure and attains kalyãn.  Of course, if Shree Krishna Bhagvãn was not 
gunãtit himself, then His bhaktas, the gopis, would not have attained 
the gunãtit state.  But, because they did attain the gunãtit state, Shree 
Krishna Bhagvãn was most certainly flawless, gunãtit, and divya. 
 
42.8
 “Vedãntis also claim, ‘Everything is pervaded by Brahm’.  Just as the 
gopis developed  love  for Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn,  all  women  develop 
love  for  their  husbands,  and  all  men  develop  love  for  their  wives.  
However,  they  do  not  attain  what  the gopis attained.    Instead,  they 

GADHADÃ I 
- 111 - 
attain  gloomy Narak.    Therefore,  those  who  prescribe  that vidhi and 
nishedh are indeed true, not false; and whoever falsifies them, will be 
consigned to Narak.” 
 
42.9
 Having said this, Shreeji Mahãrãj bid “Jay Sachidãnand” to everyone, 
and returned to His residence. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 42 || 42 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 43 
The Four Types Of Mukti 
 
43.1
 In the Samvat year 1876, on the evening of Mahã sud 7 [22
nd
 January, 
1820],  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on  the 
veranda  outside  the  east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Gadhadã.  He had tied a white pãgh around His head.  He had covered 
Himself  with  a  white chãdar and  was  wearing  a  white khes as  well.  
Tassels of yellow flowers were dangling from His pãgh, and garlands 
of yellow flowers adorned His neck.  Also, bunches of yellow flowers 
had been placed above both of His ears.  A sabhã of munis, as well as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
43.2
 Looking   at   all   the bhaktas with   a   compassionate   gaze,   Shreeji 
Mahãrãj said, “I wish to ask a question, so please listen.”  He then 
began, “The Shreemad Bhãgvat  Purãn states, ‘Those who are bhaktas 
of Bhagvãn do not desire any of the four types of mukti’.    Other  great 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn also say, ‘Bhaktas of Bhagvãn do not wish for the 
four types of mukti’.  What are the four types of mukti?  The first type 
is  to  reside  in  the dhãm of Bhagvãn;  the  second  type  is  to  stay  near 
Bhagvãn; the third type is to assume a svarup similar to Bhagvãn; and 
the  forth  type  is  to  attain  powers  similar  to Bhagvãn.    These  are  the 
four  types  of mukti.    A bhakta of Bhagvãn does  not  wish  for  any  of 
these.    Instead  he  only  wishes  to  serve Bhagvãn.    Now,  my  question 

GADHADÃ I 
- 112 - 
is, ‘Why does that bhakta not wish for the four types of mukti?’  Please 
answer according to your ability.” 
 
43.3
 All   the paramhans attempted   to   answer   the   question,   but   were 
unable to do so adequately. 
 
43.4
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Here, I shall answer the question.  A 
person  who  maintains  a  desire  for  the  four  types  of mukti after 
becoming  a bhakta of Bhagvãn is  known  as  a ‘sakãm bhakta’.    In 
contrast,  a  person  who  has  no  desires  regarding  the  four  types  of 
mukti, and who only desires to serve Bhagvãn, is known as a ‘nishkãm 
bhakta’.  In fact, the Shreemad Bhãgvat states:  
 
mat-sevaya prateetam cha sãlokyãdi chatushtayam 
nechhanti sevaya puranahã krutonyat-kãlaviplutam 
If those who are only fulfilled by serving me do not desire the four types of 
mukti, such as a place in my dhãm, which are attained by serving me – then 
why would they desire anything that is ultimately perishable? 
 
sãlokya sãrshti sãmeepya sãrupyaika-tvamapyut 
deeyamãnam na gruhnanti vinã mat-sevanam janãhã 
Even if granted a place in my dhãm, powers similar to mine, my closeness, a 
svarup  similar to mine, or oneness with me, nishkãm bhaktas would not 
accept them without my sevã. 
43.5
 “This means that a nishkãm bhakta of Bhagvãn does not wish for the 
four  types  of mukti,  if  the sevã of Bhagvãn is  not  included.    He  only 
wishes  to  serve Bhagvãn.    In  turn, Bhagvãn keeps  this nishkãm 
bhakta in  His  own sevã.   Bhagvãn also  insists  on  granting  such a 
bhakta with  His  divine  powers  and  bliss,  even  though  the bhakta 
does not wish for them.  Kapil-Dev Bhagvãn has also said: 
 
atho vibhutim mama mãyã-vinastã-maishvaryam-ashtãngama-nupravruttam 
shriyam bhagavateem va spruhayanti bhadram parasya me teshnuvate tu loke 
Even though my nishkãm bhaktas have no wish for the material wealth of the 
loks up to and including the lok of Brahmã, for the eight extraordinary powers, 
or for the auspicious wealth of Bhagvãn, they still enjoy all these in my dhãm. 
 

GADHADÃ I 
- 113 - 
43.6
 “In the Geetã, such a nishkãm bhakta has been referred to as a bhakta 
with gnãn.  A sakãm bhakta, on the other hand, has been referred to 
as  materialistic.    Therefore,  a bhakta should  not  wish  for  anything 
except the sevã of Bhagvãn.  After all, wishing for anything other than 
the sevã of Bhagvãn is considered to be a flaw.  It should be overcome 
by extreme association with the nishkãm ekãntik bhakta of Bhagvãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 43 || 43 || 
   
 
Gadhadã I – 44 
The Characteristics Of Love 
 
44.1
 In the Samvat year 1876, on the morning of Mahã sud 8 [23
rd
 January, 
1820],   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   facing   west   on   a   decorated 
bedstead on the platform under the neem tree in front of the mandir 
of Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He 
was  wearing  a  white khes,  and  had  covered  Himself  with  a  white 
chãdar.  Also, He had tied a white feto around His head, and had tied a 
bokãni with one end of the feto.  A garland of white flowers decorated 
the feto.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from various places, 
had gathered before Him. 
44.2
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then asked, “What is the characteristic of having love 
towards Bhagvãn?” 
 
44.3
 Brahmãnand Swãmi attempted to describe the characteristic of love, 
but was unable to do so adequately. 
 
44.4
 Hearing his reply, Shreeji Mahãrãj commented, “You have not even 
come close to describing love.  You say it is remaining detached from 
the body and the brahmãnd, but that is not the characteristic of love.  
That is the characteristic of vairãgya.  In actual fact, love is constantly 
remembering Bhagvãn’s murti.  That is called love. 
 

GADHADÃ I 
- 114 - 
44.5
 “A bhakta with  total  love for Bhagvãn,  never  has  any  thoughts  other 
than  those  of Bhagvãn.    The  extent  to  which  he  holds  desires  other 
than those of Bhagvãn, is the extent to which he lacks in his love.  If, 
whether   knowingly   or   unknowingly,   some   thoughts   other   than 
remembering Bhagvãn’s murti were to arise in a person who has true 
love  for Bhagvãn,  it  would  be  as  distressful  for  him  as  someone 
throwing  a  handful  of  pebbles  and  sand  into  a  delicious  meal  he  is 
eating,  or  as  painful  as  being  branded  on  his  forehead  by  a  red-hot 
branding iron.  A person who feels this way should be known to have 
love for Bhagvãn.  So now, if all of you examine your hearts, you will 
realise how much love you have for Bhagvãn.” 
 
44.6
 Brahmãnand  Swãmi  then  asked,  “By  what  means  can  a  person 
develop such intense love for Bhagvãn?” 
 
44.7
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied, “Only by keeping profound association with 
the sat-purush can a person develop intense love for Bhagvãn.” 
 
44.8
 At  this  point,  Somlã  Khãchar  questioned,  “But,  we  are  intensely 
engaged  in  such  profound  association,  yet  why  does  such  intense 
love not develop?” 
 
44.9
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “It is true that you engage yourselves in 
such  profound  association,  but  as  well  as  associating  with  me,  you 
also  associate  with  the  world.    As  a  result,  intense  love  for Bhagvãn 
does not develop.” 
 
44.10
 Then,  a brãhman named  Vãlo  Dhruv,  from  Vaso,  asked  a  question.  
“Mahãrãj, how can the feelings of ‘I-ness’ and ‘my-ness’ towards the 
body and its relations, be eradicated?” 
 
44.11
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The jeev has  a  misconception  that  it  does 
not  believe  itself  to  be  the jeevãtmã,  and  distinct  from  the  body.  
Instead,  it  believes  itself  to  be  the  body.    To  illustrate  how  the  body 
clings  to  the jeevãtmã,  consider  a  person  who  wears  a dagli after 

GADHADÃ I 
- 115 - 
having  it  sewn  by  a  tailor.    That  person  then  begins  to  believe, ‘The 
tailor is my father, and the tailor’s wife is my mother’.    Such  a  person 
would be considered a fool.  In the same way, the jeevãtmã is given a 
dagli in  the  form  of  this  body.    That  body  is  born  sometimes  to  a 
brãhman couple, or sometimes to a low-caste couple, or in any of the 
other  8.4  million  life-forms.    Therefore,  a  person  who  believes  the 
body to be his true self and believes the parents of that body to be his 
own  parents,  is  called  a  fool.    He  should  be  considered  to  be  like  an 
animal.  
 
44.12
 “Moreover, out of those 8.4 million life-forms previously undertaken, 
there  is  not  a  single  mother,  sister,  daughter,  or  wife  who  keeps  the 
pati vratã vow any longer.  So, how can a person who believes these 
relations  to  be his true relations, ever overcome the feelings of ‘I-
ness’  and  ‘my-ness’?    Therefore,  without  such  understanding,  to 
eradicate attachment for a person’s birthplace and native land, is 
very difficult indeed. 
 
44.13
 “Therefore, as long as a person believes the  body  to  be  his  true  self, 
his entire understanding is totally useless.  As long as he continues to 
hold  pride  in  his varna and ãshram,  he  will  never  see  qualities  of  a 
sãdhu.  So, after discarding the feelings of ‘I-ness’ and ‘my-ness’ for 
the  body  and its  relations,  believing  the ãtmã to  be brahm-rup,  and 
after  abandoning  all  worldly  desires,  if  a  person  worships Bhagvãn 
while  following svadharma,  he  should  be  known  as  a sãdhu.    No 
distance  remains  between Purushottam Bhagvãn and  a  person  who 
has  acquired  such  qualities  of  a sãdhu.    Everything  else  may  be 
possible,   but   to   acquire   such   qualities   of   a sãdhu is   extremely 
difficult.    In  fact,  I  am  such  a sãdhu,  because  I  do  not  have  even  the 
slightest pride in my varna and ãshram.” 
 
44.14
 Shreeji Mahãrãj spoke in this way for the purpose of enlightening His 
bhakta.  In reality, He Himself is Purushottam Nãrãyan. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 44 || 44 || 

GADHADÃ I 
- 116 - 
Gadhadã I – 45 
Bhagvãn Is Sãkãr And The Light Is Nirãkãr 
 
45.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on  the  evening  of Mahã  sud 10  [24
th
 
January,   1820],   Shreeji  Mahãrãj   was   sitting   facing   south   on   the 
platform  in  front  of  the mandir of Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in  Dãdã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was wearing a white khes and had 
covered Himself with a white chãdar.  He had also tied a white pãgh 
around  His  head.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
45.2
 Gopãlãnand Swãmi then asked, “Mahãrãj, many vedãntis claim  that 
Bhagvãn is nirãkãr,  and  does  not  possess  a svarup.    Moreover,  they 
quote Vedic shloks that  support  only  that  belief.    On  the  other  hand, 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn,  such  as Nãrad,  Shukji,  and  the Sanakãdik, claim 
that Bhagvãn is sãkãr.  Of the two, who is correct?” 
 
45.3
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied, “Purushottam Bhagvãn is  eternally sãkãr, 
and  that murti is  extremely  luminous.    The  all-pervasive Brahm, 
which  is antaryãmi and sachidãnand,  is  actually  the  divine  light  of 
Purushottam Bhagvãn,  but  He  Himself  possesses  a  definite murti.  
The  Shrutis also  mention, ‘Bhagvãn looked towards Mãyã’.    Now,  if 
Bhagvãn sees,  does  that  mean  that  He  has  only  a  pair  of  eyes  and 
nothing  else?    He  also  has  hands  and  feet.    This  proves  that  He  is 
sãkãr. 
 
45.4
 “Take the example of water.  Its corresponding dev, Varun, is sãkãr in 
his  own  home,  while  water  itself  is  described  as nirãkãr.    Also,  the 
flames  of  a  fire  are  described  as nirãkãr,  while  their  corresponding 
dev, Agni,  is sãkãr in  his  own  home.    Sunlight  is  also  described  as 
being nirãkãr,  while Surya-Dev, who  resides  in  his  home,  is sãkãr.  
Similarly, sachidãnand Brahm is nirãkãr, while Purushottam Bhagvãn 
is sãkãr.    Furthermore,  that  all-pervasive sachidãnand Brahm,  is  the 
divine light of Purushottam Bhagvãn. 
 

GADHADÃ I 
- 117 - 
45.5
 “Someone may claim that the Shrutis propose  that Bhagvãn is  all-
pervasive  and  perfect,  and  is  without  features  like  hands  and  feet.  
But, those Vedic shloks that disprove the features like hands and feet, 
are   actually   disproving   the mãyik hands   and   feet.      In   reality, 
Bhagvãn’s murti is divya, not mãyik. 
 
45.6
 “When a mirror is placed in front of the sunlight, the reflection is just 
like  the  sunlight.    In  this  way,  the  light  of Purushottam Bhagvãn, 
which  is sachidãnand Brahm and  pervades  everything,  can  also  be 
seen  as sãkãr,  like Purushottam Bhagvãn,  by  the  pure antah-karans 
acting like a mirror. 
 
45.7
 “In the same way, Purushottam Bhagvãn is  always sãkãr.    He  is  not 
nirãkãr.    Those  who  do  believe  Him  to  be nirãkãr,  just  do  not 
understand.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 45 || 45 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 46 
The Creation And Destruction Of Ãkãsh 
 
46.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on  the  evening  of Mahã  sud 11  [25
th
 
January,   1820],   Shreeji  Mahãrãj   was   sitting   facing   south   on   the 
platform   near   the mandir of Shree   Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in   Dãdã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was wearing a white khes and had 
covered Himself with a white chãdar.  He had also tied a white pãgh 
around  His  head.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
46.2
 Then,  a vedãnti  brãhman by  the  name  of  Maheshvar  Bhatt  asked 
Shreeji Mahãrãj, “Everything is merged during the state of samãdhi, 
but how does ãkãsh become merged?” 
 

GADHADÃ I 
- 118 - 
46.3
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “Please  listen  carefully  as  I  explain  the 
characteristics  of ãkãsh in  detail.   Ãkãsh is  the  name  given  to  vacant 
space.    All  objects  that  exist,  reside  only  within  that  vacant  space.  
Moreover, ãkãsh pervades and resides within all of those objects.  In 
fact,  there  is  not  a  single  object  in  which  there  is  no ãkãsh.    It  even 
exists  in  the  smallest  particle  of pruthvi.    If  we  cut  that  particle  into 
millions of pieces, ãkãsh will exist within those pieces as well. 
 
46.4
 “So, when a person looks from the viewpoint of ãkãsh, the other four 
bhuts cannot  be  identified;  only ãkãsh can  be  identified.    Everything 
is dependent on that ãkãsh.  The three types of bodies, sthul, sukshma, 
and kãran,  stay  within ãkãsh.    This brahmãnd also  resides  within 
ãkãsh,  along  with  its  creator, Prakruti and Purush.    But  that ãkãsh 
also resides within Prakruti-Purush and their creations, the body and 
the brahmãnd.     Ãkãsh resides    externally    as    their    supporter.  
Therefore,  this ãkãsh is  never  merged,  neither  during  the  state  of 
sushupti nor during samãdhi. 
 
46.5
 “Someone may  argue, ‘The five bhuts have evolved from tamo-gun,  so 
how  can  that  ãkãsh  be  called  the  supporter  of  Prakruti  and  Purush?  
Also, how can it be said to pervade them all?’  Well, if Prakruti did not 
contain ãkãsh in  the  form  of  vacant  space,  then  how  could maha-
tattva – which  emerges  from Prakruti in  the  way  fruits  and  flowers 
emerge from a tree, and a calf emerges from a cow’s womb – emerge 
at  all?    Therefore, ãkãsh does  reside  within Prakruti.    Furthermore, 
ahankãr also  emerges  from maha-tattva,  so ãkãsh resides  within 
maha-tattva as  well.    The  three gun emerge  from ahankãr,  so ãkãsh 
resides  within ahankãr as  well.    The  five bhuts emerge  from tamo-
gun,  so ãkãsh resides  within tamo-gun as  well.    However,  the ãkãsh 
that  has  evolved  from tamo-gun is  subject  to  change,  whereas  the 
ãkãsh that is the support of everything is not subject to change and is 
eternal.  It is this ãkãsh that is known as Brahm and as Chidãkãsh, and 
is  the  supporter  of  all.    Moreover,  it  is  within  this ãkãsh that Purush 
and Prakruti undergo the states of expansion and contraction. 
 

GADHADÃ I 
- 119 - 
46.6
 “How is this so?  When Purush gazes at Prakruti – just as children are 
born to a man and woman – with Purush as the husband and Prakruti 
as  the  wife – children  in  the  form  of maha-tattva are  produced.    In 
this way, Prakruti takes the form of the twenty-four tattvas as well as 
the   form   of   the   body   and   the brahmãnd.      This   is   her   state   of 
expansion.    Purush pervades   all   entities   that   evolve   from   that 
Prakruti, with his powers.  This is his state of expansion. 
 
46.7
 “In time, when all the entities that have evolved from Prakruti are 
destroyed,  and Prakruti appears  to  remain  absorbed  in Purush’s 
body,  that  is Prakruti’s state  of  contraction.    When Purush reverts 
within  his  own  self – at  the  time  when all  the  entities  that  have 
evolved from Prakruti are destroyed – that is known as Purush’s state 
of contraction.  For example, when a tortoise expands, all of its limbs 
emerge  from  its  shell;  and  when  it  contracts,  it  withdraws  all  of  its 
limbs  back  into  its  shell  and  remains  totally  motionless.    That  states 
of  expansion  and  contraction  of Prakruti and Purush are  similar  to 
this. 
 
46.8
 “Also, it is only Purush,  and  not  the  all-supporting Chidãkãsh,  which 
has  an anvay-vyatirek relationship  with Prakruti and  the  entities 
evolved from her.  After all, how can something that is all-supporting 
ever  be vyatirek from  anything?    On  the  contrary, Purush always 
resides in everything. 
 
46.9
 “This brahmãnd is  surrounded  on  all  four  sides  by  the  Lokã-Lok 
mountains, just  like  a  fort.    Beyond  the  Lokã-Lok  mountains  is  Ãlok; 
beyond  Ãlok  are  the  seven  barriers;  beyond  that  is  nothing  but 
darkness; beyond that darkness, there is divine light, which is known 
as Chidãkãsh.  Above, the brahmãnd extends up to Brahm-Lok; above 
which  are  the  seven  barriers  (jad  prakruti);  above  which  there  is 
darkness  (Mãyã);  above  which  there  is  again  divine  light,  which  is 
known as Chidãkãsh. 
 
46.10
 “Below, brahmãnd extends  down  to  the  seventh  Pãtãl;  below  which 
are  the  seven  barriers  (jad  prakruti);  below  which  there  is  darkness 

GADHADÃ I 
- 120 - 
(Mãyã);  below  which  there  is  again  divine  light,  which  is  known  as 
Chidãkãsh.    In  this  way, Chidãkãsh is  present  on  all  four  sides  of  the 
brahmãnd,  as  well  as  within  the brahmãnd.  When a person’s vision 
reaches  the  perspective  of  that  all-supporting Chidãkãsh,  it  is  given 
names  like dahar-vidyã or akshi-vidyã.    However,  they  are  all  called 
brahm-vidyã. 
 
46.11
  “That Chidãkãsh is  extremely  luminous  and  eternal.    It  is  neither 
created   nor   destroyed.      Whenever   there   is   any   mention   of   the 
creation  and  destruction  of ãkãsh,  it  is  with  reference  to  the ãkãsh 
that  has  evolved  from tamo-gun,  and  which  is  full  of  darkness.    This 
ãkãsh can  be  merged,  but  the  all-supporting Chidãkãsh is  never 
merged.  This is the answer to your question.  If anyone still has any 
doubts please do ask.” 
 
46.12
 Then,  the vedãnti  brãhman and  all  the haribhaktas replied, “None of 
us have any doubts at all now.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 46 || 46 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 47 
Characteristics Of Dharma, Bhakti, Gnãn, And Vairãgya 
 
47.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on  the  morning  of Mahã  sud 12  [26
th
 
January,  1820],  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a 
decorated  bedstead  on  the  platform  under  the  neem  tree  in  front  of 
the mandir of Shree Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Gadhadã.  He was dressed entirely in white clothes.  A sabhã of munis, 
as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
47.2
 Then,  after  snapping  the  fingers  of  His  right  hand,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj 
said, “Everyone please listen with attention, as I have something to 
tell  you.    What  I  have  to  say  is  simple,  but  you  will  only  be  able  to 
grasp its meaning if you listen carefully.  Otherwise, you will not.” 

GADHADÃ I 
- 121 - 
47.3
 All the haribhaktas said, “Please do tell us, Mahãrãj.” 
 
47.4
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Of Bhagvãn’s bhaktas, some have strength 
in dharma-nishthã,  some  have  strength  in ãtmã-nishthã,  some  have 
strength   in vairãgya-nishthã,   and  some  have  strength   in bhakti-
nishthã.  Although a person may have one strength, they also possess 
all the other types, but to a lesser extent. 
 
47.5
 “A bhakta,   whose   main   strength   is   following bhãgvat-dharma, 
lovingly engages himself in performing the basic sevã of Bhagvãn and 
His bhaktas.    He  also  abides  by  the  rules,  like ahinsã and brahm-
chãrya,  which  are  related  to  the dharma of  his varna and ãshram.  
The bhakta also enjoys building mandirs for Bhagvãn, and working in 
His   gardens.      He   enjoys   offering   different   varieties   of   food   to 
Bhagvãn, and also enjoys hand-plastering and sweeping the mandirs 
of Bhagvãn and the residential halls of sãdhus.  In addition, he offers 
bhakti to Bhagvãn by  listening  to kathãs and  singing kirtans without 
any  form  of  pretence.    Moreover,  such  a bhakta who  is  strong  in 
following dharma intensely  enjoys  listening  to  and  reading shãstras 
describing bhãgvat-dharma. 
 
47.6
 “A bhakta,  whose  main  strength  is ãtmã-nishthã,  always  behaves  as 
the ãtmã,  which  is  beyond  the  three  bodies  and  the  three  mental 
states, and is described as eternal.  He understands that his ishta-dev, 
pratyaksha Shree  Krishna Paramãtmã,  is  beyond  everything,  has  an 
extremely  pure svarup,  and  forever  possesses  a divya murti.    In 
addition,  he  talks  about  and  listens  to  talks  describing  the  pure 
nature  of  his  own ãtmã,  as  well  as  talks  about Paramãtmã.    He  also 
enjoys shãstras that  contain  such  talks.    His  nature  is such  that he  is 
unable  to  tolerate  anything  that  obstructs  him  from  behaving  as  an 
ãtmã. 
 
47.7
 “A bhakta,  whose  main strength  is vairãgya-nishthã,  has  a  persistent 
dislike  for  all  worldly  objects,  but  not  towards Bhagvãn’s murti.  
Realising  those  objects  to  be asatya,  he  never  remembers  his  home, 
his family, or any other object that he has given up – in the same way 

GADHADÃ I 
- 122 - 
that he never remembers faeces once they have been excreted.  Such 
a bhakta only  keeps  the  company  of bhaktas who  are tyãgis.    In 
addition,  he  offers bhakti to Bhagvãn in  a  way  that  does  not  conflict 
with his tyãg.  His talks are always about tyãg, and he has a liking for 
shãstras that  propose tyãg.    Moreover,  he  has  an  extreme  dislike  for 
tasty  foods,  beautiful  clothes,  and  for  all  worldly  objects  related  to 
the five vishays that may interfere with his tyãg. 
 
47.8
 “A bhakta,  whose  main  strength  is bhakti-nishthã,  has  intense  love 
only  for Bhagvãn’s svarup.    Apart  from  that svarup of Bhagvãn,  he  is 
unable to focus his mind’s vrutti towards  worldly  objects.    Yet,  he 
lovingly offers rich clothes and jewellery to Bhagvãn.  He also enjoys 
listening  to  the  human-like charitras of Bhagvãn and  also  greatly 
enjoys  listening  to  any shãstra that  describes Bhagvãn’s svarup.    In 
addition, he only develops love towards those bhaktas who have love 
for Bhagvãn.  Besides them, he never develops love towards even his 
own  son  or  relatives.    Such  a bhakta is  always  engaged  in  some 
activity that is related to Bhagvãn. 
 
47.9
 “Now,  after  reflecting  upon  this  talk,  which  describes  the 
characteristics  of bhaktas possessing  these  four  strengths,  all  of  you 
please reveal which of these is your strength.  In actual fact, this talk 
is rather like a mirror, as it reveals a person’s own true strength as it 
is.  Furthermore, those who are Bhagvãn’s bhaktas are never without 
a  strength.    However,  as  they  may  have  not  recognised  it,  they  find 
that they cannot intensify it.  As long as it is not strengthened, it will 
continue to fluctuate according to the talks a person hears.  So, after 
thinking over this talk, please reveal your strengths as they are.” 
 
47.10
 All the haribhaktas then revealed their respective strengths. 
 
47.11
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then requested, “Those who have similar strengths, 
please  stand  up  together.”    Then,  those bhaktas with   similar 
strengths,  stood  up  in  turn,  after  which  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  all  of 
them to sit down again. 

GADHADÃ I 
- 123 - 
47.12
 Nityãnand  Swãmi  then  asked, “Do those four types of bhaktas,  with 
their strengths, have any gun or avgun in their strengths?” 
 
47.13
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Yes, they do have gun and avgun.    Please 
listen  as  I  describe  them.    The  extent  to  which bhaktas with  those 
four   strengths   behave   according   to   the   characteristics   I   have 
described  earlier,  is  their gun.    The  extent  to  which  they  cannot 
behave according to those characteristics, is their avgun.” 
 
47.14
 Finally, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Of the four types of bhaktas, is one 
superior to the others, or are they all equal?” 
 
47.15
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “As long as each one adheres to his strength, 
then  all  four  are  equal.    However,  if  a  person  adheres  to  all  four 
strengths, then he is superior to all.  When one person is strong in all 
four,  he  is  known  as param-bhãgvat,  and  only he  can  be  called  an 
ekãntik bhakta.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 47 || 47 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 48 
Protection Against The Four Types Of Kusangis 
 
48.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on  the  evening  of Mahã  sud 13  [27
th
 
January, 1820], Swãmi Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting facing 
west on a decorated bedstead on the platform under the neem tree in 
front  of  the mandir of Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s 
darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A 
sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had 
gathered before Him.  Two oil-lamps were lit in front of Him after the 
sandhyã ãrti of Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan,  and  the Nãrãyan dhun had 
finished. 
 
48.2
 After that, Mahãrãj said “Everyone  listen  very  carefully.    I  wish  to 
speak to you.”  

GADHADÃ I 
- 124 - 
48.3
 Then, the munis and haribhaktas said, “Mahãrãj, please tell us.” 
 
48.4
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “It is my wish, that all haribhaktas receive 
a murti of Nar-Nãrãyan  Dev printed  on  paper,  for  you  to  perform 
pujã.    This pujã is  accepted  by  all shãstras.    The  Shreemad  Bhãgvat 
states  that  there  are  eight  types  of murtis,  including  a  printed murti.  
Therefore, pujã can  be  performed  upon  a  printed murti.    This  is  my 
wish. 
   
48.5
 “In the morning, all haribhaktas should bathe and then perform pujã 
of Nar-Nãrãyan.    Then,  you  should  do pradakshinã and sashtãng 
pranãm.    Then,  you  should  ask, ‘Please protect me from the influence 
of kusangis’.” 
 
48.6
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then elaborated, “There are four types of kusangis: 
the kudã-panthis,  the shakti-panthis,  the shushka-vedãntis,  and  the 
nãstiks.  If a person associates with kudã-panthis, they will cause him 
to falter in his vartmãns and make him impure.  If a person associates 
with shakti-panthis,  he  will  be  forced  to  consume  meat  and  alcohol, 
which  will  deflect  him  from  following  his svadharma.    If  a  person 
associates  with  a shushka-vedãnti,  a  person  will  fall  from bhakti and 
upãsanã,  because  such  people  claim  that  the dhãm of Bhagvãn and 
the murti Bhagvãn are all  false.    Finally,  if  a  person  associates  with 
nãstiks,   they   promote   that   only karmas are   real,   and   deny   the 
existence  of Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn,  and  therefore  leads  a  person 
astray from the path prescribed by the eternal, sacred shãstra. 
 
48.7
 “Therefore,  a  person  should  request  from Bhagvãn, ‘May I never 
encounter the company of these four types of people’.    He  should  also 
pray, ‘Mahãrãj.  Please protect me from the inner enemies of kãm, 
krodh,  lobh,  moh,  ahankãr,  irshyã,  and  the  belief  that  I  am  the  body.  
Also, forever keep me in the company of your bhaktas’.    A  person 
should daily pray to Bhagvãn in this way, and always be wary of such 
kusangis and inner enemies. 

GADHADÃ I 
- 125 - 
48.8
 “All haribhaktas should  not  think, ‘How can the picture on the paper 
protect  us  from kusang?’  A  person  should  never  bring  this  thought 
into the mind.  If all of you listen to me and perform the pujã of Nar-
Nãrãyan, I can communicate with Nar-Nãrãyan, as I am a sat-purush.  
I will say to Nar-Nãrãyan, ‘Mahãrãj.  Please remain in the murti that I 
have   given,   if   the   haribhaktas   abide   by   the   panch-vartmãn,   and 
perform pujã of the murti’. 
 
48.9
 “I will keep Nar-Nãrãyan Dev by force in the murti, and tie him with a 
rope in the form of love.  So, please keep faith that the murti on paper 
is truly Nar-Nãrãyan Dev.  Knowing this, never leave a murti without 
having  performed pujã.    In  the  morning,  after  bathing,  you  should 
perform pujã of Bhagvãn.    Then,  you  should  attend  to  your  daily 
duties.  As long as you follow the panch-vartmãn, and perform pujã of 
Nar-Nãrãyan Dev,  He  will  remain  in  this murti.    This  is  my ãgnã, 
which you all should believe with firm faith.” 
 
48.10
 The haribhaktas accepted   everything   that   was   said   by   Shreeji 
Mahãrãj. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 48 || 48 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 49 
Antar-Drashti 
 
49.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on  the  evening  of Mahã  sud 14  [28
th
 
January,  1820],  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a 
decorated  bedstead  on  the  platform  under  the  neem  tree  in  front  of 
the mandir of Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Gadhadã.    Two  small  oil  lamps  were  lit  in  front  of  Him.    He  was 
wearing  a  garland  of  yellow  flowers  around  His  neck,  and  strings  of 
yellow  flowers  decorated  both  wrists.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in 
white clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from various 
places, had gathered before Him. 

GADHADÃ I 
- 126 - 
 
49.2
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  said,  “Please  begin  a  question-answer 
discussion.” 
 
49.3
 Then, Brahmãnand Swãmi asked, “Why is it that our vrutti remains 
on Bhagvãn only  as  long  as  we  forcibly  keep  it  there,  whereas  it 
remains on worldly objects without the slightest effort?” 
 
49.4
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “The vrutti of Bhagvãn’s  bhakta never 
remains  on  anything  except Bhagvãn.    In  fact,  his  only  concern  is ‘It 
will  be  very  difficult  for me to keep my vrutti on worldly objects’.  
Therefore, Bhagvãn’s bhakta finds it difficult to keep his vrutti on any 
worldly  objects,  while  a  worldly  person  finds  it  difficult  to  keep  his 
vrutti on Bhagvãn.    A  person  whose vrutti does  not  remain  fixed  on 
Bhagvãn,  is  not  a bhakta of Bhagvãn.    Nevertheless,  if  he  attends 
satsang, he will gradually become a bhakta by listening to the talks of 
the sãdhus.” 
 
49.5
 Brahmãnand  Swãmi  then  asked  further,  “By  what  means  can  a 
person keep his vrutti on Bhagvãn?” 
 
49.6
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “The way to achieve that is antar-drashti.  
Antar-drashti is  to  constantly  look  towards  the murti of pratyaksha 
Bhagvãn that  a  person  has  attained.    Besides  that murti,  even  if  he 
sees   the   six chakras,   or Golok,   or Vaikunth,   or   other dhãms of 
Bhagvãn, it should not be considered to be antar-drashti.  Therefore, 
to look at Bhagvãn’s murti that a person has seen within his heart, or 
to look at the murti of Bhagvãn visible externally, is known as antar-
drashti.    However,  wherever  a  person’s vrutti strays  apart  from 
Bhagvãn’s murti, it is called bãhya-drashti.”  
 
49.7
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then told the paramhans, “Please arrange yourselves 
into pairs, and begin a question-answer discussion.” 
 

GADHADÃ I 
- 127 - 
49.8
 Then,   the paramhans carried   out   a   question-answer   discussion 
amongst  themselves  for  quite  some  time,  through  which  Shreeji 
Mahãrãj examined their intelligence. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 49 || 49 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 50 
A Person With A Sharp Intellect 
 
50.1 
In  the Samvat year  1876,  in  the  early  hours  of Mahã  vad 1  [31
st
 
January,  1820],  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  in  front  of  the  veranda 
outside Dãdã Khãchar’s medi in Gadhadã.  He was dressed entirely in 
white clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from various 
places, had gathered before Him. 
 
50.2
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  asked  the munis, “A person who possesses a 
sharp  intellect  attains Brahm.    Can  the  intellect  of  a  person  who  is 
skilled  in  the  managing  of  worldly  affairs  be  called  sharp,  or  not?  
Also,  can  the  intellect  of  a  person  who  is  very  skilled  in  interpreting 
the shãstras and the Purãns be called sharp, or not?” 
 
50.3
 The munis attempted  to  answer  the  question,  but were  unable  to  do 
so adequately. 
 
50.4
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then explained, “Some people may  be  extremely 
skilled in worldly affairs, yet they do nothing at all to safeguard their 
own kalyãn.    Others  know  the  precise  meanings  of  the  various 
shãstras,   Purãns,   and   other   historical shãstras,   yet   they   too   do 
nothing  to safeguard  their kalyãn.    Therefore,  they  cannot  be said  to 
possess  a sharp  intellect.   Instead,  they  possess  a  blunt  intellect.    On 
the  other  hand,  a  person who  safeguards his kalyãn,  even  though he 
may  possess  only  a  limited  intellect,  should  be  considered  to  have  a 
sharp  intellect.  So,  a  person  who  pays  more  attention  to  worldly 
affairs,   even   though   he   possesses   a   sharp   intellect,   should   be 
considered to possess a blunt intellect. 

GADHADÃ I 
- 128 - 
50.5
 “This is stated in the Bhagvad Geetã:  
 
yã nishã sarva-bhootãnãm tasyãm jãgrati sayami 
yasyãm jãgrati bhutãni sã nishã pashyato munehe 
 
“This shlok explains  that  while  worshipping Bhagvãn,  all  worldly 
people  behave  as if  their mind  is covered in  darkness,  like  the  night.  
Therefore,   they   do   not   worship Bhagvãn.      On   the   other   hand, 
Bhagvãn’s bhaktas are  awake  in  worshipping Bhagvãn.    Therefore, 
they  are  constantly  engaged  in  worshipping Bhagvãn.    Furthermore, 
everyone’s mind is awake with respect to the five vishays – shabda, 
sparsh,  rup,  ras,  and  gandh – and  they  continuously  indulge  in  the 
vishays.  In contrast, the minds of the Bhagvãn’s bhaktas, are covered 
in darkness with regards to indulging in the vishays.  Therefore, they 
do not indulge in them. 
 
50.6
 “Therefore,  only  a  person  who  remains  alert  regarding  his  own 
kalyãn can be said to possess a sharp intellect.  As for others, they are 
all mere fools.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 50 || 50 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 51 
Nishchay In Bhagvãn Can Only Be Developed Through Bhagvãn 
 
51.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on  the  night  of Mahã  vad 2  [1
st
 February, 
1820], Swãmi Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  west-facing  rooms  in  front  of 
the mandir of Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Gadhadã.    He  was  wearing  a  white survãl and  a  white angarkhu.    He 
had also tied a white pãgh around His head.  A sabhã of munis, as well 
as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
51.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Please ask a question.” 
 

GADHADÃ I 
- 129 - 
51.3
 Purnãnand Swãmi then asked, “The ten indriyas are  produced  from 
rajo-gun,  and  the  four antah-karans are  produced  from sattva-gun.  
Therefore,  all  the indriyas and antah-karans are mãyik.    However, 
Bhagvãn is  beyond Mãyã.    So,  how  can  a  person  develop nishchay in 
Bhagvãn through  the mãyik antah-karans?    Also,  how  can  a  person 
see Bhagvãn with his mãyik indriyas, like the eyes?” 
 
51.4
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Mãyik objects  can  be  realised  by mãyik 
means, and if a person has realised Bhagvãn through the same mãyik 
antah-karans and indriyas, then it implies that Bhagvãn must also be 
mãyik.  Is that your question, or not?” 
 
51.5
 Purnãnand Swãmi and all the munis confirmed, “Yes Mahãrãj.  That is 
our question.  You have clarified it for us.” 
 
51.6
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “The answer to that is  as  follows:  
The surface area of the pruthvi is 500,000,000 yojans.  On the pruthvi, 
there are various objects such as trees, mountains, pots, and clothes.  
That pruthvi exists  within  all  of  those  objects,  and  it  also  exists 
distinctly  on  its  own.    So,  if  a  person  looks  from  the  perspective  of 
pruthvi, then it appears that pruthvi has taken the form of all of those 
objects,  and  that  no  object  exists  apart  from pruthvi.    However, 
pruthvi itself has been produced from a small portion of jal.  This jal 
is below the pruthvi, around it, as well as above it.  In fact, jal totally 
pervades  the pruthvi.    If  a  person  looks  from  the  perspective  of jal, 
only jal exists, and there is no pruthvi at all.  Furthermore, that jal has 
been produced from a small portion of tej.  If a person looks from the 
perspective of tej, only tej exists, and there is no jal at all.  This tej, has 
been  produced  from  a  small  portion  of vãyu.    If  a  person  looks  from 
the  perspective  of vãyu,  only vãyu exists,  and  there  is  no tej at  all.  
This vãyu has  been  produced  from  a  small  portion  of ãkãsh.    If  a 
person looks from the perspective of ãkãsh, the other four bhuts, the 
entities  evolved  from  them  (the  body  and the brahmãnd)  are  not 
apparent at all.  It appears as if only ãkãsh exists everywhere.  
 

GADHADÃ I 
- 130 - 
51.7
 “This ãkãsh has  been  produced  from  a  small  portion  of tãmas-
ahankãr.    That tãmas-ahankãr, along  with rãjas-ahankãr, sãttvik-
ahankãr,   the bhuts,   the indriyas,   and antah-karans,   and   their 
presiding devs,  have  been  produced  from  a  small  portion  of maha-
tattva.  So, if a person looks from the perspective of maha-tattva, the 
three types of ahankãrs, the bhuts, the indriyas, the antah-karans, and 
their  presiding devs,  do  not  exist – only maha-tattva exists.    So,  if  a 
person looks from the perspective of maha-tattva, the three types of 
ahankãrs,   the bhuts,   the indriyas,   the antah-karans,   and   their 
presiding devs,  do  not  exist – only maha-tattva exists.    That maha-
tattva has  been  produced  from  a  small  portion  of Pradhãn-Prakruti.  
Therefore,  if  a  person  looks  from  the  perspective  of Prakruti,  maha-
tattva does  not  exist – only Prakruti exists.    However,  during  the 
period  of  destruction, Prakruti is  absorbed  into  a  small  portion  of 
Purush,  and  at  the  time  of  creation,  she  is  produced  again  from  a 
small  portion  of Purush.    Therefore,  if  a  person  looks  from  the 
perspective of Purush, only Purush exists – there is no Prakruti. 
 
51.8
 “Countless millions of Purush are  produced  from  a  small  portion  of 
Mahã-Mãyã.    So,  if  a  person  looks  from  the  perspective  of Mahã-
Mãyã, only Mahã-Mãyã exists – there is no Purush.  Mahã-Mãyã itself 
is  produced  from  a  small  portion  of Mahã-Purush.    So,  if  a  person 
looks from the perspective of Mahã-Purush, only Mahã-Purush exists 
– there  is  no Mahã-Mãyã.    That Mahã-Purush,  rose  from  a  small 
region of Akshar – the dhãm of Purushottam Bhagvãn.  Therefore, if a 
person  looks  from  the  perspective  of Akshar,  neither Mahã-Purush 
nor  anything  else  exists – there  is  only Akshar.    But,  above  that 
Akshar is Purushottam Bhagvãn,  who  is  even  greater  than Akshar.  
That Purushottam Bhagvãn is  that  all-doer – responsible  for  the 
creation,  sustenance,  and  destruction  of  everything – and  is  also  the 
cause of all. 
 
51.9
 “Now, a cause always pervades its effect, and at the same time, also 
remains  distinct  from  it.    Therefore,  if  a  person  looks  from  the 

GADHADÃ I 
- 131 - 
perspective  of Purushottam Bhagvãn,  the  cause  of  all,  then  nothing 
else appears to exist – except Purushottam Bhagvãn.   
 
51.10
 “It is this very Bhagvãn who, out of compassion for the kalyãn of the 
jeevs,  gives darshan in  a pratyaksha  svarup to  all  the  people  on  this 
earth.  At that time, if a person realises this greatness of Purushottam 
Bhagvãn by  intense  association  with  a sant,  then  all  of  his indriyas 
and antah-karans become divya,  just  like Purushottam Bhagvãn’s 
indriyas and antah-karans.    Then,  through  those indriyas and antah-
karans, he can develop nishchay in Bhagvãn.  For example, a diamond 
can only be cut by another diamond; it can never be cut by anything 
else.    Similarly,  the nishchay in Bhagvãn can  only  be  developed 
through Bhagvãn.    In  the  same  way,  the darshan of Bhagvãn is  also 
possible  only  through Bhagvãn,  but  it  is  not  possible  through  the 
mãyik indriyas and antah-karans.” 
 
51.11
 Having delivered this talk, Shreeji Mahãrãj bid “Jay Sachidãnand” to 
all and returned to His residence. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 51 || 51 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 52 
Realising Bhagvãn Through The Four Shãstras 
 
52.1
 In the Samvat year 1876, on Mahã vad 3 [2
nd
 February, 1820], Shreeji 
Mahãrãj   was   having kathã read   on   the   veranda   outside   Dãdã 
Khãchar’s medi in Gadhadã.  He was dressed entirely in white clothes.  
A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had 
gathered before Him. 
 
52.2
 During the kathã, a reference was made to the fact that a person who 
understands Bhagvãn’s svarup through  the  four  sets  of shãstras – 
Sãnkhya,  Yog,  Vedãnt,  and  Panch-Rãtra – should  be  known  to  be 
completely enlightened. 

GADHADÃ I 
- 132 - 
52.3
 Hearing this, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, please explain how 
a  person  can  realise Bhagvãn through  those  four  sets  of shãstras?  
Also,  what  deficiency  remains  in  a  person  who  does  not  realise 
Bhagvãn in that way?” 
 
52.4
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The Sãnkhya shãstras propose Bhagvãn as 
being the twenty-fifth tattva.  Also, just as the twenty-four tattvas are 
incapable of doing anything without Bhagvãn, jeev and ishvar are also 
incapable  of  doing  anything  without Bhagvãn.    Therefore, jeev and 
ishvar are  also  included  in  the  twenty-four tattvas.    These  twenty-
four tattvas,   which   include jeev and ishvar,   are   called kshetra.  
Bhagvãn, the twenty-fifth tattva, is called kshetragna. 
 
52.5
 “The Yog shãstras propose Bhagvãn as being the twenty-sixth tattva, 
and  as  possessing  a  definite murti.    They  describe jeev and ishvar as 
the twenty-fifth tattva, and describe the twenty-four tattvas as being 
distinct  from  them.    They  prescribe  that  a  person  should  perform 
dhyãn upon Bhagvãn,  realising  his ãtmã to  be  distinct  from  those 
tattvas. 
 
52.6
 “The Vedãnt shãstras describe Bhagvãn as pervading all, as being the 
cause  of  all,  as  the  supporter  of  all,  as nirgun, advait,  and niranjan,  
and  as  the  non-doer  despite  being  the  all-doer.    They  also  describe 
Him as possessing only divya qualities and not any worldly qualities. 
 
52.7
 “The Panch-Rãtra shãstras describe  that  there  is  only  one Bhagvãn, 
who  is Shree  Krishna Purushottam Nãrãyan.    He  incarnates  into  the 
four svarups of Vãsudev, Sankarshan, Aniruddha, and Pradyumna.  It is 
also  He  who  assumes  an avatãr on  this  earth.    A  person  who  offers 
the nine types of bhakti to Him, attains kalyãn. 
 
52.8
 “These are the various descriptions of Bhagvãn as given in those four 
scriptures.    A  person  who  thoroughly  understands  them,  should  be 
known to be completely enlightened. 
 

GADHADÃ I 
- 133 - 
52.9
 “However, a discrepancy would arise if a person were to try to 
understand Bhagvãn’s svarup using  only  the  Sãnkhya shãstras,  while 
leaving  the  other  three shãstras aside.    The  Sãnkhya shãstras do  not 
describe jeev and ishvar as   being   distinct   from   the   twenty-four 
tattvas.  Therefore, when the followers of Sãnkhya reject the twenty-
four tattvas and believe their jeevãtmã to be distinct from them, they 
would  understand  their jeevãtmã as  the  twenty-fifth tattva,  but  not 
Bhagvãn. 
 
52.10
 “There is a weakness in trying to understand Bhagvãn’s svarup from 
the Yog shãstras alone.    They  believe  that Bhagvãn possesses  a 
definite murti,   but   the   followers   of Yog consider   Him   to   have 
limitations.    They  do  not  understand  Him  to  be  the antaryãmi of  all, 
and absolutely perfect. 
 
52.11
 “There is also a weakness in trying to understand Bhagvãn’s svarup 
from  the  Vedãnt shãstra alone.    They  believe  that Bhagvãn – who  is 
the cause of all, pervades all, and is nirgun – is nirãkãr.  They do not 
realise   that Bhagvãn’s eternal svarup possesses divya limbs,   not 
mãyik arms and legs. 
 
52.12
 “There is also a weakness in trying to understand Bhagvãn’s svarup 
from  the  Panch-Rãtra shãstras alone.    They  offer bhakti to Bhagvãn, 
but   they   see Bhagvãn’s avatãrs with   human   traits.      Also,   they 
understand Bhagvãn to be present in only one place at any one time, 
and not as being the antaryãmi of all and absolutely perfect. 
 
52.13
 “These are the types of weaknesses that arise when a person does 
not  realise Bhagvãn using  a  combination  of  all  four  sets  of shãstras.  
However,  if  a  person  attempts  to  realise Bhagvãn using  all  four  sets 
of shãstras together,    then    the    weakness    raised    from    the 
understanding    of    one    set    of shãstras,    is    corrected    by    the 
understanding  of  another.    Therefore,  a  person  who  understands 
Bhagvãn using all four sets of shãstras, is known as being completely 
enlightened. 

GADHADÃ I 
- 134 - 
52.14
 “If he ignores one set of shãstras, he is known as being three-quarters 
enlightened.  If he ignores two sets of shãstras, he is known as being 
half-enlightened.    If  ignores  three  sets  of  scriptures,  he  is  known  as 
being a quarter enlightened.  If he acts according to his own fictional 
interpretations of the shãstras while ignoring all four sets of shãstras, 
then  even  if  he  is  a vedãnti or  a  person  with upãsanã,  he  is  lost.    He 
cannot  be  said  to  have  found  the  path  of kalyãn.    Therefore,  such  a 
vedãnti’s gnãn is  hypocritical,  and  a  person  with  such upãsanã is  a 
hypocritical bhakta.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 52 || 52 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 53 
Progression And Regression In Satsang 
 
53.1
 In the Samvat year 1876, on Mahã vad 9 [8
th
 February, 1820], Shreeji 
Mahãrãj  was  sitting  facing  west  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on  the 
veranda outside the west-facing rooms in front of the mandir of Shree 
Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was 
wearing  a  white survãl and  a  white angarkhu.    He  had  tied  a  rich, 
orange shelu with a silken border around His waist.  He had also tied 
a rich, orange reto with a silken border around His head, with tassels 
of flowers hanging from it.  He was also wearing garlands of flowers 
around  His  neck.  A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
53.2
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then requested, “Someone please ask a question.” 
 
53.3
 Muktãnand  Swãmi  then  asked, “There  are  those  in satsang who 
progress day by day.  There are also those who seem to fall back day 
by day, despite being in satsang.  What is the reason for this?” 
 
53.4
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “A person who perceives avgun in a great 
sãdhu,  gradually  falls  back  in satsang.    Conversely,  a  person  who 

GADHADÃ I 
- 135 - 
perceives gun in  that sãdhu progresses,  and  his bhakti towards 
Bhagvãn flourishes.    Therefore,  a  person  should  not  perceive avgun 
in a sãdhu.  Instead, should only perceive his gun. 
 
53.5
 “A person should perceive an avgun in  that sãdhu only  if  he  breaks 
any  of  the vartmãns prescribed  by Bhagvãn.    However,  even  if  the 
sãdhu has  no  flaws  in  following  his vartmãns,  on  seeing  some  small 
irregularity in the sãdhu’s nature, a person may feel that is improper.  
Therefore, they focus only on the sãdhu’s avgun, and ignore his many 
gun.  This causes the person’s own glorious gun,  like  of gnãn and 
vairãgya, to diminish.  
 
53.6
 “Therefore, only if there is a flaw in the following of the vartmãns, 
should  a  person  find avgun;  he  should  not  find avgun in  a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn for any other reason. 
 
53.7
 “Moreover, if a person does not find flaws, his glorious gun will begin 
to flourish day by day.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 53 || 53 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 54 
Upholding Bhãgvat-Dharma 
The Gateway To Moksh 
 
54.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on Mahã  vad 11  [9
th
 February,  1820], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress  with  a 
large,   cylindrical   pillow   on   the   veranda   outside   the   west-facing 
rooms  in  front  of  the mandir of Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in  Dãdã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was wearing a white khes and had 
covered Himself with an orange reto that had a border of interlocked 
golden  and  silver  threads.    He  had  also  tied  a feto around  His  head 

GADHADÃ I 
- 136 - 
using a sky-blue silken cloth.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
54.2
 Muktãnand  Swãmi  then asked,  “Through  the  discussion between 
Janak  Rãjã  and  the  nine Yogeshvars,  the  eleventh skandh of  the 
Shreemad Bhãgvat describes the nature of a bhãgvat-dharma.  How is 
the bhãgvat-dharma sustained?  Also, how can the gateway to moksh 
be opened for the jeev?” 
 
54.3
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “Bhãgvat-dharma is     sustained     by 
maintaining  intense  love  towards  an ekãntik  sãdhu of Bhagvãn,  who 
possesses  the  qualities  of svadharma, gnãn, vairãgya,  and bhakti 
coupled with knowledge of Bhagvãn’s greatness.  Maintaining intense 
love  towards  such  a sãdhu also  opens  the  gateway  to moksh for  the 
jeev.  Kapil-Dev Bhagvãn has said to Devhuti: 
 
prasanga-majaram pãsha-mãtmanaha kavayo viduhu 
sa eva sãdhushu kruto moksha-dvãrama-pavrutam 
 
“This means: ‘If a person maintains intense love towards an ekãntik 
sant  of  Bhagvãn  just  as  strongly  as  he  maintains  intense  love  towards 
his own relatives, then the gateway to moksh is open for him’.” 
 
54.4
 Shuk   Muni  then  asked,  “By  what  characteristic  can  someone 
recognise  a  person  who  would  never  lapse  in  following  his dharma, 
even under the most difficult circumstances?” 
 
54.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A person whose nature is such that he is 
strict in obeying the ãgnã of Bhagvãn, and who would never disobey 
any ãgnã,   however   minor   or   major,   will   never   fall   back   from 
following dharma,   irrespective   of   the   circumstances.      Therefore, 
determination  in dharma is  found  only  in  those  who  strictly  follow 
Bhagvãn’s ãgnã, and their satsang also remains strong.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 54 || 54 || 

GADHADÃ I 
- 137 - 
Gadhadã I – 55 
Bhajan, Smaran, Vartmãn 
 
55.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on Mahã  vad 11  [10
th
 February,  1820], 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  the  east-facing  veranda  of  His own 
residence in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed 
entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of sants,  as  well  as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
55.2
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “Please  begin  a  question-answer 
discussion.” 
 
55.3
 Muktãnand Swãmi then asked, “Why is a person unable to remain 
determined in bhajan, smaran, and the vartmãns?” 
 
55.4
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  explained,  “A  person’s  determination  does  not 
remain steady due to the influence of unpleasant desh, kãl, kriyã, and 
sang.  There are three levels of this determination: uttam, madhyam, 
and kanishth.    If  there  are  extremely  unpleasant desh, kãl, kriyã,  and 
sang,  then  even  the uttam level  determination  is  dissolved.    Then, 
what    can    be    said    of    the madhyam and kanishth levels    of 
determination? 
 
55.5
 “However, if a person’s determination remains exactly the same, 
despite  the  influence  of  extremely  unpleasant desh, kãl, kriyã,  and 
sang,  then  the  force  of  good  deeds  and  merits  previously  performed 
by  him  must  be  extremely powerful.  On the other hand, a person’s 
intellect  may  become  polluted  despite  extremely  pleasant desh, kãl, 
kriyã, and sang.  This is because he must have committed a great sin, 
or must have insulted a great bhakta of Bhagvãn, either in a past life 
or in this life.  Therefore, despite association with pleasant desh, kãl, 
kriyã, and sang, his mind has still become polluted. 
 
55.6
 “If a person serves a great sant attentively, his sins will be burnt and 
reduced  to  ashes.    On  the  other  hand,  if  a  person  associates  with  a 

GADHADÃ I 
- 138 - 
great sinner, then his own sins increase, and any religious deeds that 
he  may  have  performed,  will  also  be  destroyed.    Also,  a  person  who 
puts  his  arms  around  the  necks  of  prostitutes  drinking  alcohol,  and 
then  blames Bhagvãn by  thinking, ‘Why did Bhagvãn not keep my 
mind stable?’ should be known as an utter fool.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 55 || 55 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 56 
A Bhakta With Gnãn 
Knowledge Of The Ãtmã 
Upãsanã 
 
56.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on  the  evening  of Mahã  vad 12 [11
th
 
February, 1820], Shreeji Mahãrãj was sitting on a decorated bedstead 
on  the  veranda outside  the  west-facing  rooms in  front  of  the mandir 
of Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He 
was  wearing  a  white khes,  and  had  covered  Himself  with  an  orange 
reto, interlaced with gold and silver threads.  He had also tied a reto, 
with  a  deep  orange  border,  around  His  head.    A sabhã of munis,  as 
well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered  before  Him.  
After singing the ‘Nãrãyan’ dhun, some munis were singing kirtans to 
the accompaniment of a jhãnjh and mrudang.   
 
56.2
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Please conclude singing kirtans, and let us 
conduct a question-answer discussion for a while.”  Having said this, 
Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Let me ask a question.” 
 
56.3
 He then began by saying, “Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn mentions  four 
types  of bhaktas in  the  Geetã.    Of  these,  the bhaktas with gnãn are 
described  as  being  the  best.    However,  if  all  four have  an  equal  level 
of nishchay in Bhagvãn’s svarup,   how   is   the bhakta with gnãn 
superior?” 

GADHADÃ I 
- 139 - 
56.4
 The munis attempted  to  answer  that  question,  but  were  unable  to 
give a satisfactory answer. 
 
56.5
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  explained,  “The bhakta possessing gnãn 
behaves  as brahm-svarup and  thoroughly  realises  the  greatness  of 
Bhagvãn.  As a result, no desires remain in his mind except for those 
of Bhagvãn’s svarup.    However,  the  other  three  types  of bhaktas do 
not fully realise the greatness of Bhagvãn, despite having nishchay in 
Bhagvãn.  This means that desires, other than those for Bhagvãn, still 
continue.    That  is  why  they  do  not  come  equal  to  those bhaktas 
possessing gnãn.    Therefore,  if  any  desires,  other  than  those  related 
to Bhagvãn, remain in a bhakta, it is a serious flaw. 
 
56.6
 “Another major flaw is when a person who has no worldly desires at 
all  and  has  intense vairãgya,  behaves  arrogantly  on  account  of  that 
vairãgya.    Also,  he  may  have  the  intense  force  of  knowledge  of  the 
ãtmã,  or  may  have  the  force  of  intense bhakti towards Bhagvãn.  
However,  if  out  of  arrogance,  he  is  unable  to  bow  before  humble 
bhaktas or  is  unable  to  address  them  humbly,  then  that  is  also  a 
serious  flaw  in  him.    As  a  result  of  that  flaw,  his  strength  in satsang 
does not flourish.   
  
56.7
 “Consider the  analogy  of  a  stone-cutter  digging  a  well.    If  the  stone 
underneath sounds hollow when he strikes it, he predicts, ‘There will 
be  plenty  of  water  in  this  water-well’.    However,  if  the  stone  sounds 
solid on the surface, and sparks fly when he strikes it, then the stone-
cutter assumes, ‘If there is going to be any water in this water-well at 
all, there will be very little’.    In  the  same  way,  a  person  who  remains 
arrogant  due  to  the  pride  of  his gnãn, vairãgya,  and bhakti,  may  be 
called  great,  but  his  greatness  will  be  very  limited,  as  he  does  not 
perceive  the gun of  humble bhaktas.    Therefore,  whoever  wishes  to 
please Bhagvãn should  not  become  arrogant  due  to  the  pride  of  his 
gnãn, vairãgya,  and bhakti,  or  due  to  any  other  glorious gun he  may 
have.    As  a  result, pratyaksha Shree  Krishna Nãrãyan will  become 
pleased, and will reside in his heart.” 

GADHADÃ I 
- 140 - 
56.8
 Muktãnand Swãmi then asked, “Mahãrãj, by which method can a 
person  overcome  the  pride  which  arises  due  to gnãn, vairãgya, 
bhakti, and other glorious gun?” 
   
56.9
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “While realising the greatness of Bhagvãn’s 
bhaktas, if he physically bows down to them, serves them, recognises 
thoughts  of  pride  when  they  arise  in  his  heart,  and  maintains  the 
force of thought, then pride is eradicated.” 
 
56.10
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then continued, “A bhakta’s great,  loving bhakti for 
Bhagvãn may be so intense, that Bhagvãn does as that bhakta wishes.  
However, if that bhakta develops pride in his heart due to that bhakti, 
it presents a serious flaw on his part.  Also, a bhakta may be arrogant 
due  to  his  knowledge  of  the ãtmã or  due  to  his vairãgya,  but  that 
arrogance  only  serves  to  strengthen  his  belief  of  being  the  body.  
Therefore, bhaktas of Bhagvãn should  not  hold  on  to  any  form  of 
pride whatsoever.  That is the only means to please Bhagvãn. 
 
56.11
 “Furthermore,  if great bhaktas of Bhagvãn examine  themselves  and 
look  inwards  towards  their  own  hearts  when  even  a  little  pride 
arises,  they  would  notice  an  expression  of  disgust  on  the murti of 
Bhagvãn residing within their hearts.  Conversely, when they behave 
humbly, Bhagvãn’s murti residing  within  their  hearts  would  appear 
to  have  an  extremely  pleased  expression.   Therefore,  using  the force 
of thought, a bhakta of Bhagvãn should not allow any sort of pride to 
arise. 
 
56.12
 “However, if pride does exist with gnãn, vairãgya,  and bhakti,  it  is 
rather  like  impurities  added  to  gold.    If  impurities  are  added  to 
twenty-four  carat  gold,  it  becomes  twenty-two  carat.    Adding  more 
impurities  renders  it  eighteen-carat.    Adding  even  more  impurities 
renders  it  twelve-carat  gold.    In  the  same  way,  as  impurities  (pride) 
mix  with  that bhakta’s gnãn, vairãgya,  and bhakti,  the  purity  of  all 
three  gradually  decreases.    Therefore, gnãn, vairãgya,  and bhakti 
without pride, are like twenty-four carat gold. 

GADHADÃ I 
- 141 - 
56.13
 “If a person is arrogant, the qualities of gnãn, vairãgya,  and bhakti 
may  make  him  appear  virtuous  from  the  surface,  but  he  does  not 
have  any  inner-strength.    For  example,  this pruthvi,  with  a  surface 
area of 500,000,000 yojans, supports the oceans, the mountains, and 
all forms of life, and so it appears very strong.  However, because the 
pruthvi floats on jal like a dung-cake, jal appears to be much stronger 
than pruthvi.  Likewise, tej appears to be much stronger than jal, and 
vãyu appears  to  be  even  stronger  than tej.    Finally,  although  it 
appears  to  have  no  strength  at  all, ãkãsh is  the  strongest  of  them  all 
since  it  supports  all  the  other  four.    Similarly,  the  qualities  of gnãn, 
vairãgya, and bhakti of a bhakta who has no pride, are as powerful as 
ãkãsh.    He  may  not  outwardly  appear  to  be  powerful, but  such  a 
humble bhakta is superior to all. 
 
56.14
 “Moreover, just as a child never has any feelings of pride, in the same 
way,  no  matter  how  much  praise  or  respect  he  encounters,  a sãdhu 
should always behave without pride – just like a child.” 
 
56.15
 Muktãnand Swãmi then asked another question:  “The jeev is distinct 
from the indriyas, antah-karans, and prãns.  It is also distinct from the 
three  mental  states  of jãgrat, svapna,  and sushupti,  and  the  three 
bodies  of sthul, sukshma,  and kãran.    After  hearing  this  in satsang,  a 
firm  belief  of  this  has  been  developed.    So  why  does  the  blissful 
jeevãtmã,  while  engaged  in  the bhajan and smaran of Paramãtmã, 
still associate with the indriyas, antah-karans, prãns, the three mental 
states,  and  the  three  bodies,  causing  it  to  become  miserable  due  to 
the influence of disturbing thoughts?” 
 
56.16
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Many people become siddh,  many  become 
sarvagna,  and  many  become devs.    Therefore,  they  attain  countless 
types   of   greatness,   including Akshardhãm.      All   this   is   achieved 
through  the  force  of  the upãsanã of Bhagvãn,  and  without upãsanã 
nothing  can  be  accomplished.    Therefore,  the  distinction  between 
ãtmã and  non-ãtmã cannot  be  realised  by merely understanding  the 
distinction as given in the shãstras, nor can it be realised by listening 

GADHADÃ I 
- 142 - 
to  talks  from  senior sãdhus  and  deciding  in  the  mind,   ‘I shall now 
distinguish between ãtmã and non-ãtmã’.  Instead, it is the extent of a 
person’s nishchay in   his ishta-dev that   determines   how   much 
distinction he develops between ãtmã and non-ãtmã.  In fact, without 
using  the  strength  of  his ishta-dev,  no  spiritual  activities  can  be 
fulfilled. 
 
56.17
 “In contrast, a person who has loving bhakti for Bhagvãn,  like  the 
gopis,  has  completed  all  spiritual  activities.    However,  if  a  person 
does not have such love, then he should understand the greatness of 
Bhagvãn in   the   following   way: ‘Bhagvãn  is  the  master  of  Golok, 
Vaikunth,  Shvet-Dvip,  and  Brahm-Mahol.    Although  He  appears  to  be 
like a human for the purpose of granting happiness to His bhaktas, His 
murti   in   His   dhãms   like   Golok   and   Vaikunth,   radiates   with   the 
brilliance  of  millions  and  millions  of  suns  from  each  part  of  His  body.  
However,  in  Mrutyu-Lok,  humans  serve  Him,  and  He  becomes  visible 
only  when  a  small oil  lamp  is  lit  in  front  of  Him.    Nonetheless,  it  is  He 
who provides light to those like the sun and the moon.  That Bhagvãn is 
such  that  Radhikã,  Lakshmi,  and  His  other  bhaktas  constantly  serve 
Him  in  His  dhãms.    Following  the  destruction  of  the  brahmãnds,  it  is 
only  this  pratyaksha  Bhagvãn  who  remains.    Also,  it  is  this  same 
Bhagvãn  who,  at  the  time  of  creation,  creates  countless  millions  of 
brahmãnds through Prakruti and Purush’. 
 
56.18
 “Thinking of Bhagvãn’s greatness  in  this  way,  is  the  only  method  for 
understanding  the  distinctions  between ãtmã and  non-ãtmã.    In 
addition,  the  extent  of  that bhakta’s nishchay in Bhagvãn,  coupled 
with  the  knowledge  of Bhagvãn’s greatness,  also  determines  the 
amount  of vairãgya that  develops  in  that bhakta’s heart.    Therefore, 
after  abandoning  the  dependence  on  the  strength  of  other  spiritual 
activities,   a   person   should   rely   exclusively   on   the   strength   of 
Bhagvãn’s upãsanã.   
 
56.19
 “Such a bhakta believes, ‘However great a sinner a person may be, if at 
the end of his life, he utters ‘Swãminãrãyan’, he will be redeemed of all 

GADHADÃ I 
- 143 - 
sins and will reside in Brahm-Mahol.  Then, how can there be any doubt 
about  a  bhakta,  who  has  taken  refuge  in  that  Bhagvãn,  attaining  the 
dhãm  of  Bhagvãn?’  That  is  how  he  understands  the  greatness  of 
Bhagvãn.      Therefore,   a bhakta of Bhagvãn should   increase   the 
strength  of  their upãsanã of Bhagvãn day  by  day,  by  practicing 
satsang.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 56 || 56 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 57 
The Most Extraordinary Method To Attain Moksh 
 
57.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on Fãgan sud 2  [15
th
 February,  1820], 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  in  the  residential  hall  of  the sãdhus  in 
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was dressed entirely in white 
clothes.    A sabhã of sãdhus,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various 
places, had gathered before Him. 
 
57.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Those of you who know how to engage 
in a question-answer discussion, may ask one question each.”  
 
57.3
 Muktãnand    Swãmi    then    asked,  “Mahãrãj,  what  is  the  most 
extraordinary means of attaining moksh?” 
 
57.4
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The knowledge of Bhagvãn’s svarup and the 
knowledge  of Bhagvãn’s greatness  are  the  two  most  extraordinary 
means to attain moksh.” 
 
57.5
 Muktãnand Swãmi then asked another question, “What is the nature 
of love towards Bhagvãn?” 
 
57.6
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “The nature of true love is that it should 
not be developed by logical thinking.  However, if a person develops 

GADHADÃ I 
- 144 - 
love by logically thinking of Bhagvãn’s gun, then perceiving avgun in 
Bhagvãn will  cause  his  love  to  be  broken.    Therefore,  it  is  best  to 
leave   such   love   as   it   was   originally,   rather   than   repeatedly 
establishing  it  and  then  raising  doubts  about  it.    Instead,  a  person 
should develop love towards Bhagvãn with blind faith.  After all, love 
developed  by  logically  thinking  of Bhagvãn’s gun cannot  be  trusted.  
Therefore,  a  person  should  develop  the  same  type  of  love  towards 
Bhagvãn as he has for his bodily relations.  This love is known as love 
due  to  blind  faith.    However,  having  said  this,  love  developed  by 
realising Bhagvãn’s greatness    is    of    a    totally    different    nature 
altogether.” 
 
57.7
 Shivãnand Swãmi then asked, “Although a person has an intense 
yearning  to  stay  in  the satsang,  why  is  it  that  some  inappropriate 
svabhãvs are still not eradicated?” 
 
57.8
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “If a person has not developed a dislike 
for  the svabhãv that  is  holding  him  back  in satsang,  how  can  he  be 
said to have an intense yearning for satsang?  And how can he be said 
to  have  realised  that svabhãv to  be  his  enemy?    For  example,  if  a 
friend  of  yours  were  to  kill  your  brother,  your  friendship  with  him 
would  no  longer  remain.    Instead,  you  would  be  prepared  to  cut  off 
his  head.    This  is  because  the relationship  with  a  brother  is  closer 
than  that  with  a friend.   Likewise,  a  person  may  have  a svabhãv that 
causes him to break his vartmãns and fall from satsang.  Despite this, 
if he still does not have any feeling of hatred towards it and does not 
develop  bitterness  towards  it,  then  he  does  not  have  total  love  for 
satsang.    On  the  other  hand,  if  his  love for satsang is like  the  love  he 
has   for   his   brother,   then   he   would   shun   that   negative svabhãv 
immediately.  After all, the jeev is extremely powerful.  The mind and 
indriyas are   all   merely   the kshetra,   whereas   the jeev is   their 
kshetragna; the jeev can achieve whatever it attempts.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 57 || 57 || 

GADHADÃ I 
- 145 - 
Gadhadã I – 58 
The Body, Kusang, And Past Sanskãrs 
 
58.1
 In the Samvat year 1876, at the time of the sandhyã ãrti on Fãgan sud 
5 [18
th
 February, 1820], Shreeji Mahãrãj was sitting in the residential 
hall of the paramhans in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was 
dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
58.2
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Please ask a question.” 
 
58.3
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, when a bhakta of Bhagvãn 
engages  in bhajan and smaran of Bhagvãn,  he  is  disturbed  by  the 
forces of rajo-gun and tamo-gun in his heart.  As a result, he is unable 
to  experience  the  bliss  of bhajan and smaran.    So,  how  can  a  person 
overcome the force of rajo-gun and tamo-gun?” 
 
58.4
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “The influence of the gun is  due  to  three 
factors – the  body, kusang,  and  past sanskãrs.    Of  these,  the gun that 
arise due to the body are overcome by reflecting upon the ãtmã and 
the non-ãtmã.  Gun that have arisen due to kusang are eradicated by 
keeping  the  company  of  a sãdhu.    Should  these two  methods  fail  to 
eradicate the force of rajo-gun and tamo-gun, then the problem lies in 
the  influence  of  some  unpleasant sanskãrs of  the  past;  they  are  very 
difficult to eradicate.” 
 
58.5
 Ãnandãnand Swãmi then asked, “How can such unpleasant sanskãrs 
of the past be eradicated?” 
 
58.6
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  answered,  “If  an  extremely  great sant becomes 
pleased   upon   a   person,   then   regardless   of   how   unpleasant   the 
person’s sanskãrs may be, they are all destroyed.  Moreover, if a great 
sant is   pleased,   a   beggar can   become   a   king.      No   matter   how 
unpleasant a person’s prãrabdha may  be,  it  becomes  pleasant.    Also, 
he avoids any terrible hardships that lie ahead.” 

GADHADÃ I 
- 146 - 
58.7
 Ãnandãnand Swãmi asked further, “How can a person please such a 
great sant?” 
 
58.8
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj explained, “First of all, he must be honest with a 
great sant.    He  must  also  abandon kãm, krodh, lobh, moh, mad, 
matsar, ãshã, trushnã, ahankãr,  and irshyã.    Moreover,  he  should 
behave as a dãs of a sant, and maintain a constant effort to eradicate 
pride from his heart.  While doing so internally, he should physically 
continue  to  bow  to  everyone  as  well.    As  a result,  the  great sant will 
become pleased with him.” 
 
58.9
 Mahãnubhavãnand Swãmi then asked, “Mahãrãj, while staying in 
satsang, how can a person eradicate all of his faults?  Also, how can a 
person’s bhakti towards Bhagvãn continue to flourish day by day?” 
 
58.10
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The more a person continues to perceive 
the gun of the great sant, the more his bhakti begins to flourish.  If he 
realises the truly great sant to be completely nishkãmi, then even if he 
has as much kãm as a dog, he will also become nishkãmi.  Conversely, 
if he perceives the avgun of kãm in the great sant, then no matter how 
nishkãm he may be, he becomes full of intense kãm.  In the same way, 
if a person views the great sant to be full of krodh or lobh, then he will 
also   become   full   of krodh and lobh.      Therefore,   if   a   person 
understands  the  great sant to  be  absolutely  free  of kãm, lobh, svãd, 
mãn,  and sneh,  he  will  also  become  free  of  all  of  those  evil  natures 
and become a faithful bhakta. 
 
58.11
 “What are the characteristics of such a faithful bhakta?   Well,  just  as 
he has a natural dislike for objects that cause misery, similarly he has 
a  natural  dislike  for  the  attractive  five vishays (shabda,  sparsh,  rup, 
ras,  and  gandh).    Moreover,  he  has  firm nishchay in Bhagvãn alone.  
Such a person should be known as a faithful haribhakta. 
58.12
 “The only way of becoming such a faithful bhakta, is by behaving as a 
dãs of  the dãs of Bhagvãn,  and  by  realising, ‘All these bhaktas are 
great, and I am inferior compared to them all’.    Realising  this,  he 

GADHADÃ I 
- 147 - 
behaves  as  a dãs of  the bhaktas of Bhagvãn.    All  the  evil  natures  of  a 
person  who  behaves  in  this  way  are  destroyed;  and  day  by  day, 
glorious  qualities, such  as gnãn, vairãgya,  and bhakti,  continue  to 
flourish within him.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 58 || 58 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 59 
Unique Love For Bhagvãn 
 
59.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on Fãgan sud 14  [27
th
 February,  1820], 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  facing  west  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on 
the  veranda  outside  the  west-facing  rooms  in  front  of  the mandir of 
Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He 
was  wearing  a  white khes and  had  covered  Himself  with  a  white 
chãdar.  He had also tied a white cloth, with a border of silken thread, 
around  His  head.    His  forehead  had  been  smeared  with  sandalwood 
paste.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places, 
had gathered before Him. 
 
59.2
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  said,  “Please  begin  a  question-answer 
discussion.” 
 
59.3
 Muktãnand  Swãmi  then  asked,  “Mahãrãj.    How  can  unique  love 
towards Bhagvãn be developed?” 
 
59.4
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “A  person  should  have  the  following 
understanding:    Firstly,  the  belief  of Bhagvãn – ‘He  who  I  have 
attained is undoubtedly Bhagvãn Himself’.    He  should  also  have  the 
attributes  of  an ãstik.    Furthermore,  he  should  realise  the  divine 
powers  of Bhagvãn – ‘This Bhagvãn is the master of Brahm-Mahol, 
Golok,  Shvet-Dvip,  and  all  other  dhãms.    He  is  the  master  of  countless 
millions  of  brahmãnds  and  is  the  all-doer’.    He  should  never  believe 
Purush, Kãl, karma, Mãyã,  the  three gun,  the  twenty-four tattvas,  or 
Brahmã and  the  other devs,  to  be  the  creators  of this brahmãnd.  

GADHADÃ I 
- 148 - 
Instead,   he   should   realise   only Purushottam Bhagvãn to   be   the 
creator, and the antaryãmi of all.  Such an understanding, along with 
nishchay in pratyaksha Bhagvãn, is the only way to develop a unique 
love for Bhagvãn.” 
 
59.5
 Muktãnand   Swãmi asked  further,  “Despite  having  realised  the 
greatness  of Bhagvãn,  why  does  a  person  still  not  develop  a  unique 
love for Bhagvãn?” 
 
59.6
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  explained,  “If  he  has  realised  the  greatness  of 
Bhagvãn in  this  way,  then  he  indeed  does  have  a  unique love  for 
Bhagvãn,   but   he   does   not   realise   it.      For   example, Hanumãnji 
possessed  immense strength,  but  he  did  not  realise  it  until someone 
else revealed it to him.  Also, when Baldevji abducted Pralamb-Ãsur, 
Baldevji    possessed    tremendous    strength,    but    he    himself    was 
unaware of this fact.  He only became aware of his strength when he 
was  informed  by  a  divine  voice  from  the  sky.    In  the  same  way  that 
bhakta does  indeed  have  unique  love  for Bhagvãn,  but  he  is  simply 
not aware of it.” 
 
59.7
 Muktãnand  Swãmi  asked further, “How can the strength of the love 
be realised?” 
 
59.8
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “A person realises that he has a unique 
love for Bhagvãn, by practicing satsang and by listening to the sacred 
shãstras.” 
 
59.9
 Muktãnand Swãmi then asked another question.  “Desh, kãl, and kriyã 
become  either  pleasant  or  unpleasant.    Is  this  due to sang,  or  due  to 
some other factor?” 
 
59.10
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “All desh are  a  part  of  the  earth,  and  so 
they  are  the  same  everywhere.   Kãl is  also  the  same  everywhere.  
However,    wherever    there    is    an    extremely    powerful    person, 
unpleasant desh,  unpleasant kãl,  and  unpleasant kriyã,  all  become 

GADHADÃ I 
- 149 - 
pleasant   by   his   influence.      Conversely,   by   associating   with   an 
extremely  vile  sinner,  even  pleasant desh,  pleasant kãl,  and  pleasant 
kriyã,  become  unpleasant.    Therefore,  the  person  is  the  governing 
factor  in  determining  whether desh, kãl,  and kriyã are  pleasant  or 
unpleasant. 
 
59.11
 “If that person is extremely powerful, he will influence desh, kãl, and 
kriyã, according to his nature, throughout the whole world.  A person 
of  slightly  less  power  will  be  able  to  influence  only  one  region.    A 
person  who  is  even  less  powerful  will  be  able  to  influence  only  one 
village.    A  person  of  even  less  power  than  that  will  be  able  to 
influence  only  a  neighbourhood  or  his  own  household.    In  this  way, 
the  pleasant  and  unpleasant  influences  of desh, kãl,  and kriyã are 
dependent   upon   the   purity   and   impurity   of   these   two   types  of 
people.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 59 || 59 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 60 
Following Ekãntik Dharma 
Eradicating Worldly Desires 
 
60.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on Fãgan  vad 1  [29
th
 February,  1820], 
Shreeji Mahãrãj was sitting in the residential hall of the paramhans in 
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was wearing a white khes and 
had  covered  Himself  with  a  white chãdar.    He  had  also  tied  a  white 
pãgh around  His  head,  which  was  decorated  with  tassels  of  white 
flowers.  Garlands of white flowers were hanging around His neck.  A 
sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had 
gathered before Him. 
 
60.2
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Of all spiritual activities, the activity of 
eradicating  worldly  desires,  is  the  greatest.    A  person  can  do  this  by 
bearing in mind his craving for the vishays – shabda, sparsh, rup, ras, 

GADHADÃ I 
- 150 - 
and  gandh – and  by  thinking, ‘Is my desire for Bhagvãn equal to my 
desires for the world?  Is it greater?  Or is it less?’  A  person  should 
examine himself in this way.  For example, if a person’s ears are 
drawn  to worldly  talks  just  as  much  as  they  are  drawn  to  talks 
related  to Bhagvãn,  then  he  should  realise, ‘My desire for Bhagvãn is 
equal to my desire for the world’.  He  should  examine  all  the  other 
vishays in this way. 
 
60.3
 “While examining himself in this way, if a person gradually decreases 
his worldly desires and increases his desire for Bhagvãn, he begins to 
develop  an  understanding  where  he  views  all vishays equally.    After 
such  calmness  has  developed,  honours  and  insults  will  appear  to  be 
the  same  to  him.  Moreover,  pleasant  and  unpleasant  types  of  touch 
will  appear  to  be  the  same;  attractive  sights  and  unattractive  sights 
will appear to be the same; a girl, a young lady and an old woman will 
appear  to  be  the  same;  gold  and  rubbish  will  appear  to  be  the  same 
as well.  Similarly, pleasant and unpleasant tastes and smells will also 
appear  to  be  the  same.    When  a  person  can  instinctively  behave  in 
this  way,  it  should  be  known  that  his  worldly  desires  have  been 
overcome.   
 
60.4
 “In fact, to behave above the influence  of  worldly  desires,  is  the 
dharma of  a  person  who  is ekãntik.    But,  if  some  desires  do  remain, 
then  even  in  a  person  is  able  to  attain samãdhi and  control  his nãdi 
and prãns,   those   desires   will   draw   him   back   out   of samãdhi.  
Therefore,   only   a   person   who   overcomes   worldly   desires   is   an 
ekãntik bhakta.” 
 
60.5
 Muktãnand Swãmi then asked, “What are the means to eradicate 
worldly desires?” 
 
60.6
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Firstly, a person requires firm ãtmã-nishthã.  
Secondly,  he  should  realise  the  insignificance  of  the  five vishays.  
Thirdly,  he  should  realise  the  profound  greatness  of Bhagvãn,  and 

GADHADÃ I 
- 151 - 
think, ‘Bhagvãn is the master of all dhãms – Vaikunth,  Golok,  Brahm-
Mahol.    So,  having  attained  that  Bhagvãn,  why  should  I  have  affection 
for  the  pleasures  of the vishays, which are useless?’  A  person  should 
think of Bhagvãn’s greatness in this way. 
 
60.7
 “He  also  thinks, ‘If  I  become  unworthy  of  going  to  the  dhãm  of 
Bhagvãn,   due   to   some   deficiency   remaining   while   worshipping 
Bhagvãn, and He were to place me in Indra-Lok or Brahm-Lok, there is 
still a million-fold more bliss there, in comparison to this world’.  With 
such  a  thought,  a  person  should  become  free  of  all  desires  for  the 
insignificant   pleasures   of   the   world.      So,   by   realising Bhagvãn’s 
greatness  in this  way,  he  becomes  free  of  worldly  desires.    Then,  he 
feels, ‘I never did have any desires.  It was all like some kind of illusion.  
In reality, I have always been free of desires’.    This  is  what  a  person 
experiences. 
 
60.8
 “This ekãntik dharma can only be attained by following the ãgnã of a 
sant who is free of worldly desires, and who has love for Bhagvãn.  It 
cannot be attained merely by reading shãstras.  Even if a person were 
to  attempt  to  repeat  those  talks  exactly,  having  merely  heard  them, 
he  would  not  be  able  to  do  so  properly.    Therefore,  a  person  can 
attain ekãntik dharma only  from  someone  who  has  already  attained 
the state of ekãntik dharma.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 60 || 60 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 61 
The Importance Of Upãsanã At The Time Of Death 
Bhagvãn Becomes Bound To His Bhakta 
 
61.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on Fãgan  vad 3  [3
rd
 March,  1820],  Shreeji 
Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on  the  platform  under 
the  neem  tree  in  front  of  the mandir of Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in 
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He had tied a white cloth, with a 

GADHADÃ I 
- 152 - 
border  of  silken  thread,  around  His  head.    He  was  wearing  a  white 
khes,  and  had  covered  Himself  with  a  white pachhedi.    He  was 
wearing  garlands  of  white  flowers  around  His  neck,  and  tassels  of 
white flowers were hanging from the left side of His pãgh.  A sabhã of 
munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before Him. 
 
61.2
 Muktãnand Swãmi then asked, “How can a person remain calm even 
under the influence of lust, anger, greed, and fear?” 
 
61.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A person who has firm ãtmã-nishthã and 
believes ‘I am not the body, but I am the ãtmã, which is distinct from 
the body, and is the knower of all’,  never  loses  his  calmness.    On  the 
other  hand,  a  person  without ãtmã-nishthã may  try  many  other 
means, but he cannot remain calm.” 
 
61.4
 Brahmãnand Swãmi then asked, “To what extent does ãtmã-nishthã 
actually help a person at the time of death?” 
 
61.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “When faced with the task of crossing  a 
river,  a  person  who  knows  how  to  swim,  can  easily  cross  it.    On  the 
other  hand,  a  person  who  is  unable  to  swim  will  be  left  standing.  
However, when faced with the task of crossing an ocean, both require 
the aid of a ship.  Similarly, a river (cold and heat, hunger and thirst, 
honour  and  insult,  happiness  and  misery)  may  be  crossed  by  a 
person with ãtmã-nishthã.  However, death is like an ocean and both 
a person with ãtmã-nishthã and a person without it, require the help 
of  a  ship  (nishchay)  in Bhagvãn.    Therefore,  only  the  firm  refuge  of 
Bhagvãn is  helpful  at  the  time  of  death.   Ãtmã-nishthã alone  is  of  no 
use whatsoever at the time of death.  For this reason, a person should 
firmly develop nishchay in Bhagvãn.” 
 
61.6
 Muktãnand Swãmi then asked, “It is said that siddhis are shown to the 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn.     Does   this   fact   apply  only   to   those   whose 
nishchay in Bhagvãn is   fickle,   or   also   to   those   who   have   firm 
nishchay?” 

GADHADÃ I 
- 153 - 
61.7
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “Siddhis only  appear  before  those  whose 
nishchay in Bhagvãn is continuous.  For others, they are very difficult 
to  attain.    In  fact,  those siddhis are  inspired  by Bhagvãn Himself  to 
test  His bhaktas – ‘Does he have more love for me or for the siddhis?’  
Bhagvãn tests His bhaktas in this way. 
 
61.8
 “If the bhakta happens to be completely devoted and desires nothing 
except Bhagvãn,  is  free  of  worldly  desires,  and  is  an ekãntik bhakta, 
then Bhagvãn Himself  becomes  bound  by  that bhakta.    For  example, 
Vãmanji seized Bali Rãjã’s kingdom, which comprised of the Svarg-
Lok,  Mrutyu-Lok  and  Pãtãl,  and  covered  all  fourteen loks with  His 
first  two  steps.    Bali  Rãjã  then  offered  his  own  body  for Vãmanji to 
place   the   third   step.      In   this   way,   Bali   Rãjã   devoutly   offered 
everything  to Bhagvãn.   Also,  despite  the  fact  that Bhagvãn deceived 
Bali Rãjã without any fault of his own, Bali still did not falter from His 
bhakti.    On  seeing  such  perfect bhakti for  Him, Bhagvãn ultimately 
became bound by Bali.  Although Bhagvãn bound Bali Rãjã only for a 
moment,  in  the  process, Bhagvãn himself  became  bound  by  ropes 
(Bali’s unique bhakti).  To this very day, Bhagvãn is forever standing 
at Bali’s gate, never out of Bali Rãjã’s sight, not even for a fraction of a 
second. 
 
61.9
 “Likewise, after abandoning all other worldly desires and offering 
everything to Bhagvãn, we should also remain as the dãs of Bhagvãn.  
In  the  process,  if Bhagvãn happens  to  inflict  more  misery  upon  us, 
then Bhagvãn Himself  will  become  bound  by  us.    This  is  because  He 
loves His bhaktas, and is an ocean of kindness.  He becomes bound by 
anyone  who  offers  great bhakti to  Him.    As  a  result,  the  mind  of  a 
bhakta who  has  such  loving bhakti,  becomes  so  bound  to Bhagvãn, 
that Bhagvãn is unable to free Himself from His bhakta. 
 
61.10
 “Therefore, we should become more pleased as Bhagvãn puts  us 
through  more  severe  hardships,  bearing  in  mind, ‘The more misery 
Bhagvãn inflicts upon me, the more bound He will become to me, so He 

GADHADÃ I 
- 154 - 
will  not  be  away  from  me  for  even  a  moment’.  With   such 
understanding,   a   person   should   become   increasingly   pleased   as 
Bhagvãn imposes  more  and  more  hardships.    However,  he  should 
never  become  disheartened  in  the  face  of  misery  or  for  the  sake  of 
bodily comforts.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 61 || 61 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 62 
Acquiring The Qualities Of Bhagvãn 
Never Insult A Humble Bhakta 
 
62.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on Fãgan  vad 4  [4
th
 March,  1820],  Shreeji 
Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  in  the  middle  of  the 
courtyard of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  wearing  a 
white khes and  had  covered  Himself  with  a  white chãdar.    On  His 
head, He was wearing a white pãgh that was decorated with garlands 
and tassels of white flowers.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
62.2
 Svayamprakãshãnand Swãmi then asked, “The Shreemad Bhãgvat 
states:  
 
satyam shaucham dayã kshanti-stayã-gaha santosh ãrjavam 
shamo dama-stapaha sãmyam titikshop-ratiha shrutam 
 
gnãnam virakti-raishvarya sauryam tejo balam smruti 
svatantryam kaushalam kãnti-dhairya-mardav-meva cha 
 
prãgala-bhyam prashnaya shilam shaha ojo balam bhagah 
gãmbhirya sthairya-mãstikyam kirtimãrno-naham-kruti 
 
“These thirty-nine kalyãn-kãri qualities  forever  dwell  in  the murti of 
Bhagvãn.  How can these qualities be acquired by a sãdhu?” 
 
62.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If a sãdhu develops  the  perfect nishchay in 
Bhagvãn, then he will acquire these kalyãn-kãri qualities of Bhagvãn.  

GADHADÃ I 
- 155 - 
What is that nishchay?  Well, he realises that Bhagvãn is not like Kãl, 
not  like karma,  not  like svabhãv,  not like Mãyã,  and  not  like Purush.  
He  realises Bhagvãn to  be  distinct  from  everything,  their  controller, 
and  their  cause.    But  despite  being  their  cause,  He  is  beyond  their 
influence.    A  person,  who  has  developed  a nishchay in pratyaksha 
Bhagvãn in  this  way, will  never  be  deflected.    Even  if  he  hears 
misleading shãstras,    or    if    he    hears    the    talks    of    misleading 
philosophers,  or  even  if  his  own antah-karans raises  doubts  within 
himself, his nishchay in Bhagvãn never weakens in any way. 
 
62.4
 “A  person  with  such a nishchay in Bhagvãn is   said   to   have   a 
relationship  with Bhagvãn.    Moreover,  he  naturally  acquires  the 
qualities of whomever he has a relationship with.  For example, when 
our  eyes  meet  with  an  oil  lamp,  the  light  of  that  oil  lamp  enters  our 
eyes,  which  expel  the  darkness  around  them.    In  the  same  way,  a 
person  who  has  developed  a  relationship  with Bhagvãn by  having  a 
firm nishchay in  Him,  acquires  the kalyãn-kãri qualities  of Bhagvãn.  
As  a  result,  just  as Bhagvãn is  unattached  in  all  respects  and  is 
capable   of   doing   as   He   chooses,   such   a bhakta also   becomes 
extremely capable and unattached.” 
 
62.5
 Nirvikãrãnand Swãmi then asked, “Despite having the nishchay in 
Bhagvãn,  glorious  qualities  are  still  not  acquired.    Instead, mãn and 
irshyã are increasing day by day.  What can be the reason for this?” 
 
62.6
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  explained,  “Even  if  a  person  offers amrut,   or 
shingadiyo vachhnãg, or dudh-pãk with sugar, or opium, in Bhagvãn’s 
thãl, the natural qualities in each will still remain the same.  They will 
not  change  in  any  way.    Similarly,  a  person  who  is  demonic  and 
extremely undeserving, will still not abandon his own svabhãv even if 
he  comes  into  contact  with Bhagvãn.    Furthermore,  if he  happens  to 
insult some humble bhakta of Bhagvãn, then the demonic person will 
suffer as a result.  This is because Bhagvãn is present in everyone as 
antaryãmi,   and   He   displays   His   divine   powers   whenever   and 

GADHADÃ I 
- 156 - 
however  He  wishes.    Therefore,  insulting  such a bhakta is  equal to 
insulting Bhagvãn.    As  a  result,  the  offender  suffers  severely.    For 
example,  Hiranyakashipu  was  so  powerful  that  he  had  conquered 
Svarg,  Mrutyu-Lok,  and  Pãtãl.    However,  as  he  harassed  Prahlãdji, 
Bhagvãn appeared  from  a  pillar  in  the svarup of Nrusinh,  and  killed 
Hiranyakashipu. 
  
62.7
 “Bearing this in mind, a bhakta of Bhagvãn should  strive  to  develop 
humility  and  should  never  insult  anyone,  as Bhagvãn also  dwells  in 
the  hearts  of  those  who  are  humble.    Therefore,  He  will  punish 
anyone  who  insults  humble bhaktas.    Realising  this,  a  person should 
never   hurt   even   the   smallest   of   beings.      However,   if   a   person 
indiscriminately mistreats others out of abhimãn, then Bhagvãn, who 
is  the  destroyer  of abhimãn and  who  pervades  all  as antaryãmi,  is 
unable  to  tolerate  this.    He  will  appear  in  one  form  or  another  to 
thoroughly    destroy    the abhimãn of    that    person.        Therefore, 
remaining  fearful  of Bhagvãn,  a sãdhu should  not  retain  even  the 
slightest abhimãn,  nor  should  he  hurt  even  the  smallest  of  beings.  
This is the dharma of a nirmãni sãdhu.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 62 || 62 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 63 
Perfect Nishchay 
The Greatness Of Bhagvãn 
 
63.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on Fãgan  vad 7  [7
th
 March,  1820],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on 
the  platform  outside  the west-facing  rooms  in front  of  the mandir of 
Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He 
was  wearing  a  white khes and  had  covered  Himself  with  a  white 
chãdar.  He had also tied a white cloth, with a border of silken thread, 
around  His  head.    Garlands  of  white  flowers  adorned  His  neck,  and 

GADHADÃ I 
- 157 - 
tassels  of  roses  had  been  inserted  in  His pãgh.    A sabhã of munis,  as 
well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
63.2
 Nrusinhãnand Swãmi then asked, “What kind of thoughts arise in a 
person who has a deficiency in his nishchay in Bhagvãn?” 
 
63.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A person with a deficiency  in nishchay 
would  become  extremely  overjoyed  on  seeing Bhagvãn displaying 
some  of  His  powers.    However,  when  he  sees  no  such  display  of 
divine  powers,  he  would  become  disheartened.    Despite  trying,  if  he 
is unable  to  eradicate impure  thoughts  from his heart,  he  then has  a 
dislike towards Bhagvãn.  He would feel, ‘I have bent over backwards 
practicing satsang for so long, yet Bhagvãn still has not eradicated my 
impure thoughts’.  In this way, he perceives an avgun in Bhagvãn. 
 
63.4
 “Despite much effort, if he is unable to free his mind from the objects 
he  cherishes,  he  then  perceives  that  very  same avgun in Bhagvãn.  
Specifically,  he  believes, ‘Just as I have vicious natures, such as kãm 
and  krodh,  Bhagvãn  also  has  the  same  natures.    The  only  difference is 
that Bhagvãn is regarded as being great’.  A  person  who  has  such 
doubtful  thoughts  within  his  heart,  should  be  known  to  have  a 
deficiency in nishchay; his nishchay cannot be called perfect.” 
 
63.5
 Paramchaitanyãnand  Swãmi  then  asked,  “Mahãrãj,  what  are the 
thoughts of a person with perfect nishchay in Bhagvãn?” 
 
63.6
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A person with perfect nishchay feels within, 
‘I have attained all there is to attain.  Wherever pratyaksha Bhagvãn 
resides, that itself is the highest dhãm.  All these sãdhus are like Nãrad 
and   the   Sanakãdik;   all   satsangis   are   like   Uddhav,   Akrur,   Vidur, 
Sudãmã, and the cow-herds of Vrundãvan, and female haribhaktas are 
like the Gopis, Draupadi,  Kuntãji, Sitã, Rukmani, Lakshmi, and Pãrvati.  
Now I have nothing more to achieve.  I have attained Golok, Vaikunth, 
and Brahmpur’.  A  person  with  perfect nishchay has  such  thoughts 
and experiences extreme joy in his heart.  A person who experiences 
such feelings should be known to have perfect nishchay.” 

GADHADÃ I 
- 158 - 
63.7
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj continued, “A person who has perfectly understood 
the svarup of Bhagvãn,  has  nothing  left  to  realise.    Please  listen  as  I 
now  explain  the  method  of  realising  this.    Hearing  this,  a  person 
develops firm nishchay in Bhagvãn. 
 
63.8
 “Firstly, he should realise the greatness of Bhagvãn.  To illustrate this, 
consider  the  analogy  of  a  great  king.    If  even  his  servants  and  maids 
stay  in  seven-storey  mansions,  and  their  gardens,  horses,  carriages, 
jewellery,    and    other    luxuries    make    their    houses    appear    as 
magnificent  as  Dev-Lok,  then  imagine  how  magnificent  the darbãr 
and  its  luxuries  of  that  king  must  be.    Similarly,  consider  the loks of 
the devs of this brahmãnd – Brahmã and the other devs – who follow 
the ãgnãs of Shree Purushottam Bhagvãn.  If there is no limit to those 
loks and   their   magnificence,   then   how   can   a   person   possibly 
comprehend  the  extent  of  the  magnificence  of Virãt-Purush,  from 
whose  navel Brahmã was  produced?    Furthermore,  the  master  of 
countless  millions  of  these Virãt-Purush is Purushottam Bhagvãn, 
whose dhãm is Akshar.  Within that dhãm, countless millions of such 
brahmãnds float  like  mere  atoms  in  each  and  every  hair  of Akshar.  
Such  is  the dhãm of Bhagvãn.    In  that dhãm, Purushottam Bhagvãn 
Himself  resides  eternally  with  a divya svarup.    Moreover,  countless 
divya objects exist in that dhãm.  So, if this is the greatness of Akshar, 
then how can a person possibly comprehend the extent of Bhagvãn’s 
greatness?  A person with nishchay understands Bhagvãn’s greatness 
in this way. 
 
63.9
 “Besides, that which is greater than another is more subtle than the 
other, and is also its cause.  For example, jal is greater than pruthvi, is 
the  cause  of  that pruthvi, and  is  more subtle  than  it  as  well.    In  turn, 
tej is  greater  than jal, vãyu is  greater  than tej,  and ãkãsh is  greater 
than vãyu.    In  the  same  way, Akshar, Prakruti-Purush, Pradhãn-
Purush, maha-tattva,  and ahankãr are  all  progressively  greater  than 
each other, the cause of each other and more subtle than each other.  
They also possess a svarup. 

GADHADÃ I 
- 159 - 
63.10
 “In comparison, Bhagvãn’s Akshardhãm is extremely large.  Countless 
millions of brahmãnds float like mere atoms in each of its hairs.  Just 
as   an   ant   moving   on   the   body   of   a   huge   elephant   appears 
insignificant,    everything    else    appears    insignificant    before    the 
greatness  of  that Akshar.    For  example,  an  ant  appears  large  amidst 
small  mosquitoes;  a  scorpion  appears  large  amidst  ants;  a  snake 
appears large amidst scorpions; a kite appears large amidst snakes; a 
bull  appears  large  amidst  kites;  an  elephant  appears  large  amidst 
bulls; a mountain such as Girnãr appears large amidst elephants; and 
Mount  Meru  appears  large  amidst  Girnãr.    In  turn,  Mount  Lokã-Lok 
appears  extremely  large  amidst  a  mountain  such  as  Meru.    The 
pruthvi appears  very  large  in  comparison  to  Mount  Lokã-Lok.    In 
turn, jal, the cause of pruthvi, is larger than it and is more subtle than 
it.    In  the  same  way, tej is  the  cause  of jal, vãyu is  the  cause  of tej, 
ãkãsh is the cause of vãyu, ahankãr is the cause of ãkãsh, maha-tattva 
is the cause of ahankãr, Pradhãn-Purush are the cause of maha-tattva, 
and Mul-Prakruti and Brahm are  the causes  of Pradhãn-Purush.    The 
cause   of   all   of   these   is Akshar-Brahm,   which   is   the dhãm of 
Purushottam Bhagvãn. 
 
63.11
 “That Akshar does not have any states of contraction or expansion; it 
forever  remains  in  the  same  state.    That Akshar also  possesses  a 
svarup, but because it is so vast, its svarup cannot be visualised.  For 
example,  the brahmãnd,  which  has  evolved  from  the  twenty-four 
tattvas,   is   known as Virãt-Purush.      That Virãt-Purush possesses 
features like hands and feet, but because his murti is extremely vast, 
he is beyond visualisation.  Brahmã walked for a hundred of his own 
years (one year of Brahmã is equivalent to 315,360,000 human years) 
on the stalk  of  the  lotus  that  emerged from Virãt-Purush’s navel, but 
was still unable to reach its end.  So, if the end of the lotus cannot be 
reached, how can Virãt-Purush possibly be measured?  Therefore, the 
svarup of Virãt-Purush cannot be visualised.  In the same way, despite 
having  a  definite svarup, Akshardhãm cannot  be  visualised.    This  is 
because countless brahmãnds float within its each and every hair. 

GADHADÃ I 
- 160 - 
63.12
 “It is within that Akshardhãm,  that Purushottam Bhagvãn Himself 
resides  eternally.    By  His antaryãmi powers,  He  resides in  His anvay 
svarup in Akshardhãm,  in  the  countless  millions  of brahmãnds,  and 
also  in  the ishvars of  those brahmãnds.    Also  in  that Akshardhãm, 
countless  millions  of muktas,  who  have  acquired  qualities  similar  to 
those  of Bhagvãn,  remain  in Bhagvãn’s sevã.    Also,  divine  light, 
equivalent to that of millions and millions of suns, radiates from each 
and every hair of those sevaks of Bhagvãn.  Therefore, if those sevaks 
are  so  great,  how  can  the  greatness  of  their  master, Purushottam 
Bhagvãn, possibly be described? 
 
63.13
 “That extremely powerful Bhagvãn,  enters Akshar and  assumes  the 
svarup of Akshar.    He  then  assumes  the svarup of Mul-Prakruti-
Purush, and then the svarup of Pradhãn-Purush.  Then, He enters the 
twenty-four tattvas produced   from Pradhãn,   and   assumes   that 
svarup.    He  then  enters Virãt-Purush produced  from  those tattvas, 
and  assumes  that svarup.    He  then  enters Brahmã, Vishnu,  and Shiv, 
and assumes their svarups. 
 
63.14
 “In this way, that Bhagvãn,  who  is  extremely  powerful,  extremely 
luminous,  and  extremely  great,  contains  His  own  spiritual  powers 
and divine light with Himself and becomes like a human being for the 
kalyãn of jeevs.    He  assumes  a svarup that  allows  people  to  have  His 
darshan, perform His sevã, and offer worship to Him.  For example, a 
tiny thorn that has pricked an ant’s leg cannot be removed with a 
spear  or  a  pin.    It  can  only  be  removed  using  an  extremely  fine 
needle.    In  the  same  way, Bhagvãn limits  His  own  greatness  within 
Himself,  and  assumes  an  extremely  modest svarup.    Just  as Agni 
constrains  his  own  light  and  flames  to  assume  a  human svarup, 
similarly, Bhagvãn also  suppresses  His  own  powers  and  acts  as  a 
human for the kalyãn of jeevs.  However, a foolish person thinks, ‘Why 
does Bhagvãn not manifest any powers?’  But, he does not realise that 
Bhagvãn deliberately  conceals  His  powers  for  the  sake  of  the kalyãn 
of jeevs.  After all, if He were to manifest His own greatness, then even 

GADHADÃ I 
- 161 - 
the brahmãnd would diminish into insignificance.  Then, what can be 
said of jeevs? 
 
63.15
 “Kãl, karma,  and Mãyã are  incapable  of  binding  a  person  who  has 
developed  such  firm nishchay,  coupled  with  an  understanding  of 
Bhagvãn’s greatness,  in  his  heart.    Therefore,  he  who  understands 
Bhagvãn perfectly in this way, has nothing left to achieve.” 
 
63.16
 Then, Nityãnand Swãmi asked, “When Bhagvãn assumes  a  human 
svarup,  does  He  always  do  so sequentially in  the order  described, or 
can He also assume a human svarup directly?” 
 
63.17
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “For Bhagvãn,  the  sequential  order  is  not 
necessary.  For example, a person who takes a dives into a pond can 
emerge from wherever he wishes – either at the same entry point of 
the  dive,  or  at  the  banks,  or  anywhere  nearby.    Similarly,  if  He  so 
wishes, Purushottam Bhagvãn can take a ‘dive’ in His Akshardhãm 
and directly assume a human svarup, or if He wishes, He can assume 
a human svarup following the sequential order.” 
 
63.18
 Following this explanation, Shreeji Mahãrãj continued, “I shall now 
briefly  explain  the  characteristics  of  a  person  with  extremely  firm 
nishchay,  so  please  listen  attentively.    Firstly,  a  person  with  perfect 
nishchay will  do  anything  asked  of  him  on  the  path  of pravrutti, 
without ever backing away, even if he has intense tyãg.  Moreover, he 
does   not   do   it   reluctantly;   he   does   it   willingly.      The   second 
characteristic is that regardless of any svabhãv he may possess, even 
if  it  cannot  be  eradicated  by  a  million  ways,  if  he  senses Bhagvãn’s 
insistence  in  abandoning  that svabhãv,  he  abandons  it  immediately.  
The third characteristic is that despite his own avgun, he is unable to 
live  without  the  talks, kirtans,  and  the sant of Bhagvãn,  even  for  a 
moment.      He   finds avgun only   within   himself   and   thoroughly 
perceives  the gun of  a sant.    He  also  understands  the  great  glory  of 
the talks and kirtans of Bhagvãn, as well as of the sant of Bhagvãn.  A 

GADHADÃ I 
- 162 - 
person  with  such  understanding  should  be  known  to  have  perfect 
nishchay.      Furthermore,   if   a   person   with   this nishchay were   to 
disobey  the vartmãns due  to prãrabdha,  he  would  still  not  fall  from 
the  path  of kalyãn.    In  comparison,  regardless  of  how  great  a tyãgi a 
person may be, without this nishchay his kalyãn is not guaranteed.” 
 
 || End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 63 || 63 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 64 
The Relationship Between Sharir And Shariri 
 
64.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on Fãgan  vad 9  [9
th
 March,  1820],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on 
the platform outside the east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr 
in  Gadhadã.    He  was  wearing  a  white khes and  had  covered  Himself 
with  another  black-bordered khes.    He  has  also  tied  a  white  cloth 
with a border of silken thread around His head.  Around His neck, He 
was  wearing  a  new kanthi made  from tulsi beads.   A sabhã of munis, 
as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
64.2
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then asked the munis, “The Shrutis mention that the 
ãtmã and Akshar are the sharir of Purushottam, who is Bhagvãn.  That 
ãtmã and Akshar are  not  subject  to  change,  and  are  beyond  the 
influences of mãyã.  Moreover, like Bhagvãn, the ãtmã and Akshar are 
greater than Mãyã.  Then, how can that ãtmã and Akshar be described 
as the sharir of Bhagvãn?  This is because the sharir of a jeev is totally 
different  from  the jeev itself  and  is  subject  to  change,  whereas  the 
jeev inside  the  body,  is  not  subject  to  change.    Therefore,  just  as  the 
body  of  the jeev and  the jeev itself  are  totally  different,  similarly, 
there should be the same degree of difference between Purushottam, 
and  the ãtmã and Akshar,  which  are  the sharir of Purushottam.  
Please explain how they are different.” 
 

GADHADÃ I 
- 163 - 
64.3
 All the munis answered according to their understanding, but no one 
was able to provide a precise answer. 
 
64.4
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj then said, “Allow me to answer.  The ãtmã and 
Akshar make  up  the sharir of Purushottam Bhagvãn,  and  they  are 
pervaded,  dependent,  and  powerless.    In  what way?  Well, by means 
of  His antaryãmi powers, Bhagvãn pervades  the ãtmã and Akshar, 
whereas   the ãtmã and Akshar are   the   ones   who   are   pervaded.  
Bhagvãn is    independent,    whereas    the ãtmã and Akshar are 
dependent  upon Bhagvãn.    Furthermore, Bhagvãn is  all-powerful, 
whereas  the ãtmã and Akshar are  totally  powerless  before  Him.    In 
this  way, Bhagvãn is  the shariri of  both  the ãtmã and Akshar,  and 
these two are the sharir of Bhagvãn. 
 
64.5
 “That shariri, Purushottam Bhagvãn, possesses an eternal divya murti.  
With  His antaryãmi powers, Bhagvãn resides  as  the ãtmã of  all  the 
ãtmãs.    These ãtmãs pervade their  physical  bodies,  and  are  the 
drashtã of  these  bodies.   Bhagvãn also  resides  in  all  the  physical 
bodies,  which  are  pervaded  in  relation  to  the ãtmãs.   These  physical 
bodies are the drashya of ãtmã.  In this way, Purushottam Bhagvãn is 
the ãtmã of  all.    When  referred  to  in  the shãstras as  the ãtmã of 
drashya,  which  has  a svarup, Purushottam Bhagvãn is  also  described 
to have a svarup.  When referred to in the shãstras as the ãtmã of the 
drashtã,  He  is  described  as  nirãkãr.    However,  in  reality Purushottam 
Bhagvãn is  different  from  both  the drashya,  which  has  a svarup,  and 
the ãtmã, which  does  not  have  a svarup.    He  eternally  possesses  a 
definite svarup, which is not an ordinary, worldly svarup.  Moreover, 
despite  possessing  a  definite svarup,  He  is  the drashtã of  both  the 
drashtã and the drashya. 
 
64.6
 “Furthermore, Purushottam Bhagvãn is the inspirer of both the ãtmã 
and Akshar,  is  independent  from  them,  and  is  their  controller;  He 
possesses all spiritual powers; He is greater than even Akshar, which 
is greater  than  everything.    Out  of  compassion,  that Purushottam 

GADHADÃ I 
- 164 - 
Bhagvãn appears  as  a  human  being  on  this  earth,  for  the kalyãn of 
jeevs.    Understanding  Him  to  eternally  possess  a divya svarup,  a 
person  who  offers bhakti and upãsanã to  Him  acquires  qualities 
similar  to  those  of Bhagvãn,  as  well  as  countless  other  spiritual 
powers. 
 
64.7
 “After such a person’s ãtmã has  attained  the  state  of brahm,  he 
constantly remains in the sevã of Purushottam Bhagvãn with love and 
great  devotion.    On  the  other  hand,  a  person  who  performs dhyãn 
upon Bhagvãn and offers upãsanã while believing Him to be nirãkãr, 
is merged into brahm-sushupti.  He never returns from this state, nor 
does he ever acquire any spiritual powers from Bhagvãn.” 
 
64.8
 Finally, Shreeji Mahãrãj added, “I have  delivered  this  talk  having 
experienced  it  directly  myself.    Therefore,  there  is  not  a  trace  of 
doubt about it.  Moreover, these facts can be understood only from a 
person  who  firmly  believes  that Bhagvãn is  forever divya and sãkãr.  
They  can  never  be understood  from  others.    Therefore,  these  facts 
should be thoroughly remembered by all.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 64 || 64 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 65 
Gnãn-Shakti, Kriyã-Shakti, And Ichhã-Shakti 
 
65.1
 In the Samvat year 1876, on Fãgan vad 14 [13
th
 March, 1820], Shreeji 
Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress  with  a  large,  cylindrical  pillow 
placed on the veranda outside His bedroom in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr 
in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of 
paramhans, as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered 
before Him. 
 
65.2
 While  the kathã was  being  read,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  called  the  senior 
paramhans near   Him.      When   the kathã was   completed,   Shreeji 

GADHADÃ I 
- 165 - 
Mahãrãj said, “Now, all the senior sãdhus  seated  here  will  answer 
each other’s questions.  This will reveal their level of intelligence.” 
 
65.3
 Svayamprakãshãnand Swãmi then asked Premãnand Swãmi, “How is 
ãkãsh created, and how is it destroyed?” 
 
65.4
 Paramãnand   Swãmi   attempted   to  answer   the   question,   but   was 
unable to provide a precise answer. 
 
65.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “When a child is initially in its mother’s 
womb  and  at  the  time  of  its  birth,  the  cavities  of  its  heart  and  other 
indriyas are  small.    But,  as  the  child  grows,  those  cavities  develop; 
and  the ãkãsh within  increase  as  well.    However,  when  the  child 
becomes  old,  the  cavities  of  its indriyas decrease  in  size,  and  the 
ãkãsh within also decrease.  Similarly, when Virãt’s body is produced, 
ãkãsh appears  to  be  created  in  the  cavity  of  his  heart  and  other 
internal  organs.    Also,  when Virãt’s body  is  destroyed,  the ãkãsh 
within appears to be destroyed as well.  This is how ãkãsh is created 
and  destroyed.    However,  just  as Prakruti-Purush are  eternal,  the 
ãkãsh that  is  the  supporter  of  all  is  also  eternal.    It  is  not  subject  to 
creation  and  destruction.    However, ãkãsh is  created  and  destroyed 
through samãdhi.    A  person  who  experiences samãdhi knows  its 
method.” 
 
65.6
 Paramãnand  Swãmi  then  asked  Svayamprakãshãnand Swãmi, “How 
does  the sushumnã nãdi reside  within  the  body  and  outside  of  the 
body?” 
 
65.7
 Svayamprakãshãnand  Swãmi  attempted  to  answer  the  question,  but 
could not do adequately. 
 
65.8
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then replied, “Whatever is present in this brahmãnd, 
is  also  present  within  this  body.    The  only  difference  is  that  in  the 
body the scale is small, whereas in the brahmãnd the scale is large.  In 

GADHADÃ I 
- 166 - 
fact,  the  arrangement  of  the brahmãnd is  the  same  as  that  of  the 
body.  For example, just as there are rivers in the brahmãnd, similarly 
there  are  blood  vessels  in  the  body;  just  as  there  are  oceans  in  the 
brahmãnd,  similarly  water  is  present  in  the  abdomen  of  the  body; 
and  just  as  the  sun  and  the  moon  are  present  in  the brahmãnd, 
similarly the idã nãdi and pingalã nãdi house the sun and moon in the 
body.    In  the  same  way,  just  as  other  objects  are  present  in  the 
brahmãnd, they are also present in the body. 
 
65.9
 “Also, the nãdis of the indriyas in this body are coupled with those of 
the brahmãnd.    When  a  person  acquires  control  over  the  tongue,  he 
attains Varun-Dev;  when  a  person  acquires  control  over  speech,  he 
attains Agni-Dev;  when  a  person  acquires  control  over  the  skin,  he 
attains Vãyu-Dev;  when  he  acquires  control  over  the  genitals,  he 
attains Prajãpati; and when a person acquires control over the hands, 
he  attains  Indra.    In  the  same  way,  when  a  person  controls  the 
brahm-randhra – the end portion of the sushumnã nãdi located in the 
heart – he reaches the arrogant dev by the name of Vaishvãnar Agni, 
which  resides in  the shishumãr chakra.    It  is  then  that  he  sees  the 
uninterrupted  path  of  light  from  the brahm-randhra to Prakruti-
Purush.    That  path  of  light  is  known  as sushumnã.    This  is  how  the 
sushumnã nãdi resides in the body and in the brahmãnd.” 
 
65.10
 Paramãnand   Swãmi   asked   Svayamprakãshãnand   Swãmi   another 
question, “Which state is destroyed first – the jãgrat state, the svapna 
state, or the sushupti state?” 
 
65.11
 As Svayamprakãshãnand Swãmi was unable to answer that question, 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied, “When a person focuses on the svarup of 
Bhagvãn with  love  in  the jãgrat state,  the jãgrat state  is  destroyed 
first,  then  the svapna state,  and  finally  the sushupti state.    When  the 
mind  thinks  of  and  focuses  on  the murti of Bhagvãn in  the svapna 
state,  the svapna state  is  destroyed  first,  then  the jãgrat state,  and 
finally  the sushupti state.    Furthermore,  when  a  person  attains  the 

GADHADÃ I 
- 167 - 
state  of upsham,  while  concentrating  on  the svarup of Bhagvãn,  the 
sushupti state  is  destroyed  first,  then  the jãgrat state,  and  finally  the 
svapna state.”  Shreeji Mahãrãj answered the question in this way. 
 
65.12
 Svayamprakãshãnand    Swãmi    then    asked    Paramãnand    Swãmi 
another  question,  “How  should  a  person  understand  the ‘ichhã-
shakti’, ‘gnãn-shakti’, and ‘kriyã-shakti’ of Bhagvãn?” 
 
65.13
 Laughing, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Even you probably do not know the 
answer to that question.”  He then began to give the answer Himself.  
“When sattva-gun is   predominant,   the   rewards   of   any karmas 
performed  by  a jeev are  experienced  in  the jãgrat state.    When rajo-
gun is   predominant,   the   rewards   of   any karmas performed   are 
experienced in the svapna state.  When tamo-gun is predominant, the 
rewards  of  any karmas performed  are  experienced  in  the sushupti 
state. 
 
65.14
 “When a jeev enters the state of jãgrat, it becomes inert like a slab of 
stone, and retains no type of consciousness, such as, ‘I am a pundit, or 
I  am  a  fool;  I  have  done  this  task,  or  I  want  to  do  this  task;  this  is  my 
gender, or this is my varna, or this is my ãshram; this is my name, or my 
appearance is like this.  Am I a dev, or am I a human?  Am I a child, or 
am  I  old?    Am  I  good,  or  am  I  a  sinner?’ and  so  on.    No  such 
consciousness  is  retained.    When  a jeev enters  this  state, Bhagvãn 
awakens it from unconsciousness through His gnãn-shakti and makes 
it  aware  of  its  actions.    This  is  known  as gnãn-shakti,  the  power  of 
understanding.    Furthermore,  whatever  action  a jeev engages  in,  it 
does so with the support of what is known as Bhagvãn’s kriyã-shakti, 
the  power  of  application.    Finally,  whatever  object  is  desired  by  the 
jeev,  is  acquired  with  the  help  of  what  is  known  as Bhagvãn’s ichhã-
shakti, the power of free will. 
 
65.15
 “Moreover,  the  three  states  of jãgrat, svapna,    and sushupti 
experienced  by  a jeev are  not  due  to  the  consequences of  its  own 

GADHADÃ I 
- 168 - 
karmas alone.  They are experienced only when Bhagvãn, the giver of 
the  rewards  of karmas,  allows  the jeev to  do  so.    When  a jeev, 
indulging  in  the  rewards  of  the jãgrat state,  wishes  to  enter  the 
svapna state, it cannot do so independently.  This is because Bhagvãn, 
restrains  its vrutti.    Similarly,  if  it  wishes  to  enter  the jãgrat state 
from  the svapna,  it  is  unable  to  do  so;  nor  can  it  enter  the sushupti 
state or emerge from it to enter the svapna or jãgrat sates.  It is only 
when Bhagvãn allows  it  to  indulge  in  the  rewards  of  the karmas  of 
the particular state that it is able to indulge in them.  However, a jeev 
cannot indulge in the rewards of its karmas according to its own will 
or  as  a  direct  consequence  of karmas.    This  is  how  a  person  should 
understand    the gnãn-shakti, kriyã-shakti,    and ichhã-shakti of 
Bhagvãn.” 
 
65.16
 Shreeji    Mahãrãj    answered    the    question    in    this    way,    out    of 
compassion. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 65 || 65 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 66 
Misinterpreting The Words Of The Shãstras 
The Four Avatãrs Of Bhagvãn 
 
66.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on Fãgan  vad  Amãs [14
th
 March,  1820], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  large  decorated 
bedstead  on  the  platform  outside  the  east-facing  rooms  of  Dãdã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  wearing  a khes with  a  black 
border, and had covered Himself with a white pachhedi.  He had also 
tied  a  white feto around  His  head.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
66.2
 Shreeji    Mahãrãj then  said,  “The  Shreemad  Bhãgvat  describes 
Vãsudev, Sankarshan, Pradyumna,  and Aniruddha – four avatãrs of 
Bhagvãn.    In  some  places  they  are  described  as sagun,  whereas  in 

GADHADÃ I 
- 169 - 
others  places  they  are  described  as nirgun.    The  term nirgun is  used 
in  reference  to Vãsudev Bhagvãn,  and  the  term sagun is  used  in 
reference   to Sankarshan, Aniruddha,   and Pradyumna.      However, 
when  described  as nirgun,  the  minds  of  the  listener  and  the  reader 
are  confused,  and  they  draw  the  conclusion  that Bhagvãn does  not 
possess a svarup.  However, this is their misunderstanding. 
 
66.3
 “Besides, the words of the shãstras cannot  be  understood  in  their 
true  context  by  anyone  except  an ekãntik bhakta.    These  are  words 
such as, ‘Bhagvãn is nirãkãr, luminous, nirgun, and all-pervading’.  On 
hearing   these   descriptions,   a   fool   concludes   that   the shãstras 
describe Bhagvãn as  being nirãkãr.    On  the  other  hand,  an ekãntik 
bhakta realises, ‘When the shãstras describe Bhagvãn as being nirãkãr 
and  nirgun,  they  are  referring  to  the  fact  that  He  does  not  possess  a 
mãyik svarup or mãyik characteristics.  In reality, His svarup is forever 
divya, and He possesses countless kalyãn-kãri qualities’. 
 
66.4
 “There is also a reference to Bhagvãn being  an  immense  mass  of 
divine light.  However, if there is no murti, then there can be no light 
either.    Therefore,  that  light  must  definitely  be  from  that murti.    For 
example, take the murti of Agni.  When flames radiate from his murti, 
only  the  flames – not  the murti of Agni – are  seen.    However,  a  wise 
man  realises  that  the  flames  are  definitely  radiating  from Agni’s 
murti.    Similarly,  water  radiates  from  the murti of Varun.    Although 
only  the  water – not  the murti of Varun – is  visible,  a  wise  man 
realises that the water radiates from Varun’s murti.  In the same way, 
the divine light, which has the intensity of millions of suns and is like 
brahm-sattã, is the light of the murti of Purushottam Bhagvãn. 
 
66.5
 “The shãstras also  state, ‘A thorn is used to remove a thorn, and then 
both  are  discarded.    Similarly,  Bhagvãn  assumes  a  physical  body  to 
relieve  the  earth  of  its  burdens.    Then,  having  relieved  the  earth  of  its 
burden, He discards the physical body’.  Hearing  such  words,  the 
foolish  people  are  misled  into  the  understanding  that Bhagvãn is 
nirãkãr, and they fail to realise the murti of Bhagvãn as being divya. 

GADHADÃ I 
- 170 - 
 
66.6
 “However, an ekãntik  bhakta has  the  following  understanding:   ‘To 
fulfil  Arjun’s  pledge,  both  Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn  and  Arjun  left 
Dvãrikã on his chariot to fetch the Brãhman’s son.  Crossing  Mount 
Lokã-Lok, they cut through Mãyã’s veil of darkness with the Sudarshan 
Chakra.    Driving  the  chariot  through  that  darkness,  they  entered  a 
mass of light.  There, they collected the Brãhman’s son from Bhumã-
Purush   before   returning.      This   was   only because   Shree   Krishna 
Bhagvãn’s murti was divya.  Due to the power of that divinity, the 
wooden  chariot  and  the  horses – despite  being  composed  of  the  five 
bhuts – all  became  divya  and  beyond  Mãyã,  like  chaitanya.    Had  their 
murtis not become divya, they would never have been able to rise above 
Mãyã.    After  all,  everything  that  has  evolved  from  Mãyã  ultimately 
merges into Mãyã, and can never reach Brahm, which is beyond Mãyã’.  
Therefore, it was due to the powers of Bhagvãn’s murti that the mãyik 
objects   become   non-mãyik.      A   fool   has   the   understanding   that 
Bhagvãn’s murti is mãyik,   whereas   an ekãntik sãdhu has   the 
understanding  that Bhagvãn’s murti is  greater  than Akshar.    He  also 
understands  that Purushottam Bhagvãn possesses  a  definite murti, 
and  is  the ãtmã of  countless  millions  of brahm-rup muktas,  and  also 
of Akshardhãm. 
 
66.7
 “Therefore,  regardless  of  which shãstras are   being   read,   if   they 
describe Bhagvãn as  being nirgun,  a  person  should  realise  that  they 
are merely praising the glory of Bhagvãn’s murti.  However, Bhagvãn 
always  possesses  a  definite murti.    A  person  who  realises  this  is 
known as an ekãntik bhakta.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 66 || 66 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 67 
Acquiring The Qualities Of A Sat-Purush 
 
67.1
 In the Samvat year 1876, on Chaitra sud 7 [21
st
 March, 1820], Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  in  the  residential  hall  of  the 

GADHADÃ I 
- 171 - 
munis in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was dressed entirely 
in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
67.2
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then asked the munis, “There is a sat-purush who has 
no  love  at  all  for  the  pleasure  of  this  world.    He  has  desires  only  for 
the dhãm of Bhagvãn and the svarup of Bhagvãn.  He also wishes the 
same  for  whoever  associates  with  him.    He  feels, ‘As this person has 
associated with me, it would be of great benefit to him if his desires for 
this world are eradicated, and his love for Bhagvãn is developed’.  
Furthermore, all the efforts that are made by the sat-purush, are only 
for  acquiring  bliss  after  attaining  the dhãm of Bhagvãn after  death.  
He  never  does  anything  for  the  sake  of  bodily  comforts.    So,  with 
what  understanding  can  a mumukshu acquire  the  qualities  of  such  a 
sat-purush,  and  what  understanding  causes  such  qualities  to  not  be 
acquired?  That is the question?” 
 
67.3
 Muktãnand Swãmi replied, “If a person views such a sat-purush, who 
has  no  desire  for  the  pleasures  of  this  world,  and  accepts  whatever 
words  are  uttered  by  him,  then  that mumukshu will  acquire  the 
qualities  of  that sat-purush.    A  person  who  does  not  do  so  will  not 
acquire those qualities.” 
 
67.4
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “That answer is correct, but please listen 
as  I  explain  the  method  of  understanding  by  which  a mumukshu can 
acquire the qualities of the great sat-purush.  A person perceives the 
qualities  of  such  a sat-purush,  who  has  no  love  for  anything  except 
Bhagvãn, by believing, ‘This sant is extremely great.  Despite thousands 
of people standing before Him with folded hands, he does not have the 
slightest  desire  for  the  pleasures  of  the  world.    As  for  me,  I   am 
extremely insignificant, and I am solely attached to worldly pleasures.  I 
do not understand anything at all about Bhagvãn.  Shame on me’.  In 
this  way,  he  feels  guilt and  perceives  the gun of  the  great sant.    He 
also feels guilt after realising his own avgun.  While repeating in this 

GADHADÃ I 
- 172 - 
way, vairãgya arises  in  his  heart,  and  then,  he  acquires  qualities 
similar to those of that sat-purush. 
 
67.5
 “Now, please listen as I describe  the  characteristics  of  a  person  in 
whose heart the qualities of the sat-purush are never acquired.  Such 
a  person  believes, ‘The sat-purush  is  said  to  be  great,  yet  he  has  no 
kind of common sense whatsoever.  He does not even know how to eat 
and drink properly, nor does he know how to dress properly.  Bhagvãn 
has  given  him  abundant  pleasures,  yet  he  does  not  know  how  to  enjoy 
them.    Moreover,  when  he  gives  anything  to  anyone,  he  does  so  at 
random’.  In  this  way,  he  perceives  countless  types  of avgun in  the 
sat-purush.  Such a cruel person never acquires the qualities of a sat-
purush.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 67 || 67 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 68 
Bhagvãn Resides In The Eight Types Of Murtis And In A Sant 
 
68.1
 In the Samvat year 1876, on Chaitra sud 9 [23
rd
 March, 1820], Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead 
under the neem tree in front of the mandir of Shree Vãsudev-Nãrãyan 
in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  wearing  a  white khes 
and  had  covered  Himself  with  a white chãdar.    Around  His  head,  He 
had tied a white cloth with border of silken thread.  A sabhã of munis, 
as well as haribhaktas from various places had gathered before Him. 
 
68.2
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Allow me to ask a question.” 
 
68.3
 The munis responded by saying, “Please do ask.” 
 
68.4
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “For one month during the famine of 
Samvat 1869,  whenever  I  entered samãdhi,  I  felt  I  had  gone  to 

GADHADÃ I 
- 173 - 
Purushottam-Puri,  where I  entered  and  resided in  the murti of Shree 
Jagan-Nãthji.    That murti may  appear  to  be  wooden,  but  through  its 
eyes  I  observed  everything.    I  observed  both  the bhakti and  the 
deceitful ways of the mandir’s pujãri.  In the same way, those people 
in our satsang who have mastered samãdhi can also enter the bodies 
of   others   through samãdhi,   and   see   and   hear   everything.      The 
shãstras also  mention  that  Shukji  spoke  through  the  body  of  a  tree.  
Therefore,  a  great sat-purush or Bhagvãn can  enter  wherever  they 
wish. 
 
68.5
 “Bhagvãn has  given  eight  types  of murtis  for  worship  by  His ãgnã – 
shaili   (stone),   dãrumayi   (wood),   lauhi   (metal),   lepyã   (earth   or 
sandalwood   paste),   lekhyã   (engraved   or   drawn),   saikati   (sand), 
manimayi    (gems),    and    manomayi    (mental).     Bhagvãn Himself 
personally enters those murtis and resides within them.  A bhakta of 
Bhagvãn,  who  worships  those murtis,  should  maintain  the  same 
respect for them as he does for pratyaksha Bhagvãn.  
 
68.6
 “In  the  same  way, Bhagvãn also  resides  in  the  heart  of  a sant.  
Therefore, a sant should also be respected.  In spite of that, a bhakta 
totally  fails  to  respect  him.    He  considers  a murti to  be  merely  a 
painting or to be made of stone or other materials.  Furthermore, he 
looks  upon  that sant as  an  ordinary  human  being.    But Bhagvãn 
Himself has said, ‘I forever reside in the eight types of murtis and in a 
sant’.  Still,  that bhakta behaves  disrespectfully  before  the murtis  of 
Bhagvãn and  before  a sant,  not  at  all  fearing Bhagvãn.    Does  such  a 
person have nishchay in Bhagvãn, or not?  That is the question.” 
 
68.7
 The paramhans replied,  “As  he  does  not  realise Bhagvãn to   be 
antaryãmi and  fails  to  respect  Him,  such  a bhakta does  not  have 
nishchay in Bhagvãn at all.  He does not have nishchay, so his bhakti is 
like that of a hypocrite.” 
 
68.8
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then asked further, “Will such a bhakta attain kalyãn, 
or not?” 

GADHADÃ I 
- 174 - 
68.9
 The sãdhus replied, “No, he will not attain kalyãn.” 
 
68.10
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then continued, “A person who develops such a 
nãstik attitude  towards  the murtis of Bhagvãn and  a sant,  will  not 
stop   there.      He   will   also   develop nãstik feelings   towards   the 
pratyaksha svarup of Bhagvãn whom  he  worships.    He  will  also 
develop nãstik feelings towards the dhãms of Bhagvãn, such as Golok 
and Brahmpur.      Furthermore,   he   will   come   to   believe   that   the 
creation, sustenance, and destruction of this universe are due to Kãl, 
Mãyã, and karma, but not due to the will of Bhagvãn.  In this way, he 
will become a firm nãstik.” 
 
68.11
 Muktãnand  Swãmi  then  asked,  “Is this nãstik attitude   due   to   a 
person’s past karmas, or due to the influence of kusang?” 
 
68.12
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “The sole cause of the development of 
such  a nãstik attitude  is  listening  to  the shãstras of nãstiks and 
keeping  the  company  of  a  person  who  has  faith  in  those shãstras.  
Furthermore, kãm, krodh, lobh, ahankãr, mãn, and irshyã also cause a 
nãstik attitude to develop.  A person who possesses any one of these 
svabhãvs, will not be able to believe the talks of even sãdhus, such as 
Nãrad and the Sanakãdik. 
 
68.13
 “When is such a nãstik attitude  overcome?    Well,  when  a  person 
listens   to   talks   of   the leelãs of Bhagvãn,   such   as   the   creation, 
sustenance,  and  destruction  of  the  universe  as  described  in ãstik 
shãstras,   like   the   Shreemad   Bhãgvat,   and   also   understands   the 
greatness of Bhagvãn and a sant, the nãstik attitude is overcome and 
an ãstik attitude develops.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 68 || 68 || 

GADHADÃ I 
- 175 - 
Gadhadã I – 69 
Non-Violence 
Never Think Cruelly Of Others 
Do Not Associate With A Nãstik 
 
69.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on Chaitra sud 12  [26
th
 March,  1820], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  west-facing  rooms  in  front  on 
the mandir of Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Gadhadã.  He was dressed entirely in white clothes.  A sabhã of munis, 
as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
69.2
 Following   the sandhyã ãrti of Shree   Vãsudev-Nãrãyan and   the 
‘Nãrãyan’ dhun,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  the munis, “What exactly is 
dharma?  Please base your reply on the shãstras.  The question arises 
because even the kings of the past who indulged in violence, did not 
harm those who took their refuge, nor did they allow harm to others.  
So, is the sin committed by killing others, considered the same as the 
sin of killing a person who has sought his refuge?” 
 
69.3
 The munis attempted to reply according to their own understanding, 
but due to queries raised by Shreeji Mahãrãj, no one was able to offer 
a  satisfactory  answer.    All  the munis then said, “Mahãrãj, we would 
like to put the same question to you.  Violence (hinsã) performed on 
animals, as part of a sacrifice or some other ritual, is considered to be 
dharma.  But, non-violence (ahinsã) is also considered to be dharma.  
Please clarify this.” 
 
69.4
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then explained, “Dharma involving violence is for the 
attainment  of dharma, arth,  and kãm.    Moreover,  the dharma which 
permits   violence   is   for   the   purpose   of   limiting   violence.      Non-
violence, on the other hand, is for the attainment of kalyãn – which is 
the dharma of  a sãdhu.   Dharma involving  violence  is  for  fulfilling 
worldly  desires,  but  it  is  not  for  the  attainment  of kalyãn,  whereas 
non-violence is solely for the purpose of attaining kalyãn.  

GADHADÃ I 
- 176 - 
69.5
 “Therefore, for both grahasthas and tyãgis only  non-violence  has 
been cited for the attainment of kalyãn.  For example, Uparichar-Vasu 
Rãjã  ruled  over  a  kingdom  and  still  followed  a  non-violent  lifestyle.  
Therefore,   a sãdhu should   not   bear   hatred   towards   anyone   by 
thought,   word,   or   deed.      Neither   should   he   keep   any   form   of 
aggression.  Instead, he should behave as a dãs of a dãs with all. 
 
69.6
 “In comparison, having an  aggressive  personality  is  the dharma of  a 
wicked  person,  and  behaving  in  a  calm  manner  is  the dharma of  a 
sãdhu.    Someone  may  then  ask, ‘How is it possible to maintain the 
characteristics  of  a  sãdhu,  while  trying  to  make  thousands  of  people 
follow   their niyams?’  Well,   the   reply   to   the   question   is   that 
Yudhishthir Rãjã reigned over a kingdom stretching for thousands of 
miles,   yet   he   managed   to   maintain   the   qualities of   a sãdhu.  
Conversely,  there  may  be  thousands  like  Bhimsen  who  intimidate 
others and are unable to change their ways despite being lectured.  In 
fact,  there  is  no  shortage  of  people  with  such  an  aggressive  nature; 
there  are  countless  such  people.    However,  to  be  a sãdhu,  is  indeed 
very difficult.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 69 || 69 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 70 
Saved From Death By The Prick Of A Thorn 
 
70.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on Chaitra sud 15  [29
th
 March,  1820], 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on  the  veranda 
outside  the  east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.  
He  had  tied  a  white  cloth  with  a  border  of  silken  thread  around  His 
head.    He  was  wearing  a white khes and  had covered  Himself  with  a 
white chãdar.  With His hand, He was turning a mãlã of tulsi beads.  A 
sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had 
gathered before Him. 
 

GADHADÃ I 
- 177 - 
70.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Senior paramhans,  please  ask  questions 
amongst  yourselves.    If  a grahastha has  a  question,  he  may  ask  the 
paramhans.” 
 
70.3
 Kãkã-Bhãi,  a bhakta from  the  village  of  Rojkã,  then  asked  Nityãnand 
Swãmi, “Deep within a person’s heart, something signals him to 
indulge in the vishays, while something else says ‘no’ and discourages 
him  from  indulging  in  them.    What  is  it  that  says ‘no’,  and  what  is  it 
that says ‘yes’?” 
 
70.4
 Nityãnand Swãmi replied, “It is the jeev that  says ‘no’,  and  it  is  the 
mind that says ‘yes’.” 
 
70.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Allow me to answer that question.  From 
the  very  day  we  began  to  understand  and  realise  who  our  parents 
were, they taught us: ‘This is your mother and this is your father; this is 
your  kãkã  and  this  is  your  brother;  this  is  your  mãmã  and  this  is  your 
sister; this is your mãmi and this is your kãki; this is your mãsi and this 
is  your  buffalo;  this  is  your  cow  and  this  is  your  horse;  these  are  your 
clothes  and  this  is  your  house;  this  is  your  mansion,  this  is  your  farm, 
and  this  is  your  jewellery’.  These  words  of kusangis have  been 
imprinted  in  the  mind.    How  are  they  imprinted?    Well,  it  is  like  the 
small  pieces  of  glass  that  women  attach  into  works  of  embroidery, 
where  the  mind  represents  the  embroidery,  and  the jeev represents 
the  piece  of  glass.    In  this  way,  the  words  and  the  sights  of  those 
kusangis,   along   with   the   other   types   of vishays,   have   become 
imprinted in the mind. 
 
70.6
 “Then, after the person enters satsang, the sant talks about the glory 
of Bhagvãn,  how  to  reject  the vishays,  and  also  explains  that  the 
world is  perishable.    In  this  way,  the  words  and  the sight  of  the sant 
dwell in the person’s mind.   
 
70.7
 “Take the example of two armies facing each other.  In the battlefield 
of Kurukshetra,  the  armies  of  the Kauravs and  the Pãndavs stood 
facing  each  other  and  fought  with  arrows,  spears,  and  various  other 

GADHADÃ I 
- 178 - 
types  of  weapons.    Some  fought  with  swords,  some  fought  with 
maces, and some fought with their bare hands.  In the process, some 
lost   their   heads,   others   injured   their   thighs,   and   many   were 
slaughtered.  Similarly, in the person’s antah-karans, there are forms 
of  the kusangis standing  armed  with  their  weapons  (five vishays).  
Opposite  them,  are  also  forms  of  the sant standing  armed  with 
weapons in the form of words such as, ‘Bhagvãn is satya, the world is 
perishable, and the vishays are false’.  Therefore,  a  mutual  conflict 
exists  between  these  two  sets  of  words.    When  the  force  of  the 
kusangis prevails, a desire to indulge in the vishays arises.  When the 
force   of   the sant prevails,   the   desire   to   indulge   in   the vishays 
disappears.    In  this  way,  there  is  a  conflict  within  the antah-karans.  
There is a shlok: 
 
yatra yogesh-varaha krushno yatra pãrtho dhanur-dharaha 
tatra shreer-vijayo bhootir-dhruva neetir-matir-mama 
 
“The meaning of this shlok is: Only  where  there  is  Yogeshvar,  Shree 
Krishna  Bhagvãn,  and  where  there  is  the  great  archer  Arjun,  there  is 
Lakshmi, victory,  divine  powers,  and  resolute  morality  exist’.  
Therefore,  a  person  should  have  the  firm  belief  that  victory  belongs 
to the person on whose side these sãdhus happen to be.” 
 
70.8
 Kãkã-Bhãi then asked further, “Mahãrãj, by what means can the force 
of a sant increase and the force of the kusangis decrease?” 
 
70.9
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The kusangis that  reside  internally  and 
externally,  are  both  one.    Also,  the sant residing  within  and  the sant 
residing  externally,  are  both  one.    The  force  of  the  internal kusangis 
increases  with  the  encouragement  of  the  external kusangis.    In  the 
same    way,    the   force   of    the sant within   increases    with    the 
encouragement   of   the sant residing   externally.      Therefore,   by 
avoiding   the   company  of   external kusangis,   and   by keeping   the 
company of only the sant residing externally, the force of the kusangis 
decreases  and  the  force  of  the sant increases.”  That is how Shreeji 
Mahãrãj answered that question. 

GADHADÃ I 
- 179 - 
70.10
 Again,   Kãkã-Bhãi  asked,  “Mahãrãj,  there  is  a  person  who  has 
overcome  the  fight  against kusangis,  and  for  whom  only  the  force  of 
the sant is  the  strongest.    There  is  another  person  whose  conflict  is 
still  on-going.    Of  the  two,  when  the  first  person  dies,  there  is  no 
doubt  that  he  will  attain  the dhãm of Bhagvãn.    But,  please  tell  us 
what  will  be  the  fate  of  the  second  person,  whose  conflict is  still on-
going, when he dies?” 
 
70.11
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “In a battle, one person may face Vãniyãs 
or someone from a weak social-caste.  As a result, he may easily win.  
Another  person  is  confronted  by  an  army  of  Arabs,  Rãjputs,  Kãthis, 
and  Kolis,  who  are  very  difficult  to  conquer, and  are  certainly  not  as 
easy  to  defeat  as  the  Vãniyãs.    Therefore,  his  fight  continues.    In  the 
process  of  such  fighting,  if  he  wins,  then  all  is  well and  good.    But,  if 
while  fighting  he  does  not  give  in  to  his  opponents,  despite  their 
attempts, and if he were to die at that time, would his master not be 
aware  of  his  courageous  efforts?    Would  He  not  appreciate  that, 
compared   to   the   person   who   faced   the   easy   opposition   of   the 
Vãniyãs, this person faced frightening opposition that was difficult to 
overcome?      The   master   would   indeed   be   well   aware   of   both 
situations.  In the same way, Bhagvãn is sure to help such a person as 
you  have  described.    He  will  believe, ‘This person is faced with the 
overwhelming  force of  fluctuating thoughts,  yet he  is  still  putting  up  a 
brave fight.  Therefore, he deserves to be congratulated’.  Realising 
this, Bhagvãn does help him.  For this reason, a person should remain 
carefree  and  not  worry  in  the  least.    He  should  continue  to  worship 
Bhagvãn in the same way, keep the sant the most important, and stay 
away from kusangis.”  Shreeji Mahãrãj replied joyfully in this way. 
 
70.12
 Jeevã-Bhãi,  from  the  village  Jaskã,  then  asked  Nityãnand  Swãmi, 
“How can we develop unfaltering nishchay in Bhagvãn?” 
 
70.13
 Nityãnand  Swãmi  replied,  “If  a  person  avoids  the  company  of 
kusangis and constantly keeps the company of sãdhus, then listening 
to   the   talks   of   those sãdhus   will   lead   to   the   development   of 

GADHADÃ I 
- 180 - 
unfaltering nishchay in Bhagvãn.    However,  if  he  keeps  the  company 
of kusangis, unfaltering nishchay will not develop.” 
 
70.14
 Again Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Allow me to answer that question.  A 
person  should  develop nishchay in Bhagvãn for  the sole  purpose  of 
the kalyãn of his jeev, but not out of a desire for some material object.  
For example, ‘If I practice satsang, my ill body will recover’, or ‘If I am 
childless, I will have a son’, or ‘If my sons are dying, they will live’, or ‘If 
I am poor, I will become rich’, or ‘If I practice satsang, I will regain my 
lost land’.  A person should not practice satsang while keeping desires 
for material possessions.  If a person does practice satsang with such 
desires, then he may become a very loyal satsangi if those desires are 
fulfilled.    However,  if  his  desires  are  not  fulfilled,  his nishchay will 
diminish.    Therefore,  a  person  should  practice satsang solely  for  the 
kalyãn of his jeev, and should not have any desire whatsoever for any 
material objects. 
 
70.15
 “Also, if there are ten members in a household and all ten are faced 
with death, then is it a small feat if even one is saved?  Or if a person 
was  destined  to  have  to  beg  for  food  but  received  a rotlo to  eat 
instead,  is  that  a  small  feat?    In  these  cases,  a  person  should  believe 
that  although  everything  was  going  to  be  lost,  at  least  this  much  has 
been saved!  In the same way, even if extreme misery is due to occur, 
that misery would certainly decrease slightly if a person were to keep 
the  refuge  of Bhagvãn.    However,  the jeev fails  to  understand  this.  
Also,  the  refuge  of Bhagvãn can  save  a  person  who  is  meant  to  be 
executed on a shuli with suffering a mere pinprick. 
 
70.16
 “There is a story that illustrates this:  Many thieves lived in a village.  
One of the thieves often kept the company of a sãdhu.  Then one day, 
while the thief was on his way to visit the sãdhu, a thorn pierced his 
foot.    As  a  result,  his  foot  became  swollen  and  he  was  unable  to 
accompany  the  other  thieves  in  a  robbery.    The  other  thieves,  who 
went to steal, broke into a king’s treasury and escaped with a great 
large   amount   of   money,   which   they   shared   among   themselves.  

GADHADÃ I 
- 181 - 
Naturally,  a  lot  of  money  came  their  way.    On  hearing  this  news,  the 
parents, wife, and relatives of the thief who used to sit with the sãdhu 
and  who  was  injured,  scolded  him:  ‘Because you went to the sãdhu 
instead  of  going  to  steal,  we  lost  out.    The  thieves  who  did  go  to  steal 
returned with lots of money’.  Meanwhile, the king’s army arrived, 
arrested  all  the  thieves,  and  took  them  away  to  be  executed  on  a 
shuli.    The  injured  thief  was  also  caught  and  sentenced  to  execution.  
However, all the villagers and the sãdhu stood witness and said, ‘This 
man was not involved in the theft as he had been hurt by a thorn’.  The 
thief was then released. 
 
70.17
 “In the same way, if a person who practices satsang were to face the 
suffering of being executed on a shuli, it would be reduced to the pain 
of  a  mere  thorn-pick.    After  all,  I  have  asked  Rãmãnand  Swãmi, ‘If 
your  satsangi  is  destined  to  suffer  the  distress  inflicted  by  the  sting  of 
one  scorpion,  may  the  distress  of  the  stings  of  millions  and  millions  of 
scorpions occur at each and every pore of my body, but no pain should 
distress  your  satsangi.    Also,  if  the begging  bowl  is  written  in  the 
prãrabdha of your satsangi, may that begging bowl come to me, but on 
no   account   should   your   satsangi   suffer   from   the   lack   of   food   or 
clothing.    Please  grant  me  these  two  vardãns’.  I   asked   this   of 
Rãmãnand  Swãmi,  and  he  happily  granted  it  to  me.    Therefore, 
destined   worldly   miseries,   do   not   fall   upon   a  person   practicing 
satsang.   
 
70.18
 “So, if a person practices satsang with desires for temporary material 
objects,  then  doubts  will  certainly  cloud  his nishchay.    Therefore, 
other than the desire for the kalyãn of his own jeev, a person should 
practice satsang having   no   desire   whatsoever.      Only   then   will 
unfaltering nishchay develop.”  
 
70.19
 This   is   only   a   portion   of   the   detailed   talk   delivered   by   Shreeji 
Mahãrãj.   
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 70 || 70 || 

GADHADÃ I 
- 182 - 
Gadhadã I – 71 
Bhagvãn Incarnates With His Akshardhãm 
 
71.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on  the  evening  of Chaitra  vad 4  [2
nd
 April, 
1820], Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was sitting  with  a  large,  cylindrical  pillow  on 
a decorated bedstead which had been placed on the platform in front 
of the west-facing medi in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was 
wearing  a  white khes and  had  covered  Himself  with  a  white chãdar.  
He had also tied a white feto around His head.  A sabhã of sãdhus, as 
well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered  before  Him.  
Muktãnand  Swãmi  and  some sãdhus were  singing kirtans to  the 
accompaniment of musical instruments. 
 
71.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Please conclude the kirtans for now, and 
begin a question-answer discussion amongst yourselves.” 
 
71.3
  Somlã Khãchar then asked, “Bhagvãn forgives all the mistakes of His 
bhaktas, but which one mistake does He not forgive?” 
 
71.4
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Bhagvãn forgives all other mistakes, but He 
does   not   forgive   the   mistake   of   insulting   a bhakta of Bhagvãn.  
Therefore,  a  person  should  never  harm  a bhakta of Bhagvãn in  any 
way  whatsoever.    Furthermore,  of  all  the  mistakes  made  against 
Bhagvãn, to deny the svarup of Bhagvãn is a very serious mistake.  A 
person should never make this mistake; and anyone who does make 
this mistake, commits a sin more serious than the five great sins. 
 
71.5
 “Denying the svarup of Bhagvãn is nothing more than understanding 
Bhagvãn, who eternally is sãkãr, to be nirãkãr.  In fact, Bhagvãn who 
is Purushottam,    forever    resides    with    a divya    svarup in    His 
Akshardhãm,  and  His  divine  light  is  like that  of  millions  of  suns  and 
moons.    Countless  millions  of brahm-rup muktas  serve  the  holy  feet 
of    that Bhagvãn.        That Bhagvãn,    also    known    as Parbrahm 
Purushottam, incarnates on earth out of compassion, for the kalyãn of 
the jeevs.    When  He  incarnates,  all tattvas that  He  accepts  become 

GADHADÃ I 
- 183 - 
brahm.    The  three  bodies  (sthul, sukshma,  and kãran),  the  three 
mental states (jãgrat, svapna, and sushupti), the ten indriyas, and the 
five prãns,  were  all  apparent  in avatãrs such  as Rãm and Krishna.  
Although  all  of  them appear  to  be  like  ordinary  humans,  in  reality 
they are all brahm, not mãyik.  Therefore, a person should never deny 
the svarup of Bhagvãn.” 
 
71.6
 Mãtra Dhãdhal then asked, “What is the characteristic of jealousy?” 
 
71.7
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A person who is jealous of someone cannot 
tolerate  that  person  benefiting  in  any  way.    He  would  be  pleased  if 
misery falls upon that person.  That is the characteristic of jealousy.” 
 
71.8
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  the munis, “A person who has nishchay 
in  the pratyaksha murti of Bhagvãn,  worships Bhagvãn,  and  behaves 
in  accordance  with  the niyams of satsang,  will  attain kalyãn.    That  is 
the  way  of satsang.    However,  what  are  the  methods  of kalyãn 
according to the shãstras?  The meanings of the Veds are indeed very 
difficult to understand, so they are not narrated in kathãs.  However, 
the   Shreemad   Bhãgvat   Purãn   and   the   Mahãbhãrat   contain   the 
message  of  the  Veds,  and  are  easier  to  understand.    Therefore,  they 
are widely narrated in public kathã.  Please explain how a person can 
attain kalyãn as  explained  in  the shãstras.    Also,  bear  in  mind  that 
Shankar-Ãchãrya  has  proposed  that Bhagvãn is nirãkãr,  whereas 
Rãmãnuj-Ãchãrya and other ãchãryas have proposed that Bhagvãn is 
sãkãr.    Therefore,  please  base  your  answer  on  the  principles  of  the 
shãstras.” 
 
71.9
 Using  references  from shãstras,  the munis then  disproved  the  view 
that Bhagvãn is nirãkãr,  and  promoted  the  view  that kalyãn is  only 
possible by the worship of Bhagvãn with a sãkãr murti. 
 
71.10
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then commented, “I myself also accept that view, but 
I  would  like  to  ask  you  a  question  regarding  this.   Purushottam 

GADHADÃ I 
- 184 - 
Bhagvãn is   greater   than   the nirãkãr Akshar-Brahm and   He   is 
eternally  sãkãr.    If  a  person,  who  has  found  that Bhagvãn on  this 
earth, still cherishes a desire to see Brahmpur, Golok, Vaikunth, Shvet-
Dvip,  and  the  other dhãms of Bhagvãn,  can  he  be  said  to  have 
nishchay in Bhagvãn, or not?” 
 
71.11
 The munis replied, “Despite having found Bhagvãn,  a  person  who 
constantly  feels  in  his  mind, ‘Only when I see Akshardhãm and other 
dhãms,  or  see  the  light  of  millions  and  millions  of  suns,  is  my  kalyãn 
attained,’ does not have absolute nishchay.” 
 
71.12
 Shreeji Mahãrãj argued this by asking, “What sin has he committed in 
having  a  desire  to  see Brahmpur,  the  other dhãms and  the svarup of 
brahm, that you disqualify his nishchay?” 
 
71.13
 The munis replied, “Why should a person who believes that kalyãn is 
attained  by  the  mere darshan of pratyaksha  Bhagvãn have  a  dislike 
for Brahmpur, Golok,  and  other dhãms?    After  all,  they  do  belong  to 
Bhagvãn.  Also, without Bhagvãn, he would have no desire for them.” 
 
71.14
 Shreeji Mahãrãj further questioned, “Those dhãms and  the pãrshads 
residing in them, are chaitanya and are beyond Mãyã.  So, what flaw 
is  there  in  them  that  a  person  should  not  desire  to  see  them?    Also, 
what  about Bhagvãn who  is pratyaksha on  this  earth?    How  do  you 
view His pãrshads, who are in fact perishable, and the houses He lives 
in, which can be destroyed?” 
 
71.15
 The munis replied, “We understand those houses to be like Brahmpur 
and   the   other dhãms,   and   we   understand   those pãrshads to   be 
brahm-rup.” 
 
71.16
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Brahmpur and  the pãrshads of Bhagvãn 
residing  in Brahmpur are  immortal  and  imperishable,  whereas  the 
houses and pãrshads of this Mrutyu-Lok are perishable.  How can you 
possibly compare the two?” 

GADHADÃ I 
- 185 - 
71.17
 Finally,  Nityãnand  Swãmi  requested,  “Mahãrãj,  you  will  have  to 
answer that question.” 
 
71.18
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  explained,  “When Bhagvãn incarnates   for   the 
purpose of granting kalyãn to the jeevs, He is always accompanied by 
His Akshardhãm,  His pãrshads – who  are chaitanya – and  all  of  His 
divine   powers.      However,   they   are   not   perceived   by   others.  
Nevertheless,   when   a bhakta acquires   an alokik vision   during 
samãdhi,  he  does  see  divine  light  equivalent  to  countless  millions  of 
suns  in  the murti of Bhagvãn.    Together  with  the murti,  he  also  sees 
countless millions of muktas, and also Akshardhãm itself.  Therefore, 
all of these do accompany Bhagvãn.  Despite all of this, Bhagvãn only 
accepts  the sevã of  His own,  earthly bhaktas.    He stays in  the  houses 
of  His bhaktas,  which  are  made  of  mud,  clay,  and  stone.    He  lovingly 
accepts  whatever  those bhaktas offer  Him,  whether  it  is  incense,  an 
oil lamp, food, clothes, or anything else.  He does so for the purpose of 
elevating  those  earthly pãrshads to  the  ranks  of divya pãrshads.    All 
the  objects  that  a bhakta offers  to Bhagvãn assume  a divya form  in 
the dhãm of Bhagvãn.    Moreover,  that bhakta also  attains  a divya 
svarup and  attains  those divya objects  there.    In  this  way, Bhagvãn 
accepts  all  the  offerings  offered  by  His  earthly bhaktas in  order  to 
allow  them  to  experience  everlasting  bliss.    Therefore,  a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn should  realise  that  the svarup of Bhagvãn,  along  with  His 
Akshardhãm, is present on this earth, and he should also explain this 
fact to others.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 71 || 71 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 72 
Nishchay Coupled With The Knowledge Of Bhagvãn’s Greatness 
 
72.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on Chaitra  vad 11  [9
th
 April,  1820],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  facing  east  on  a  decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  north-facing  rooms  near  the 

GADHADÃ I 
- 186 - 
mandir of Shree   Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in  Dãdã  Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Gadhadã.  He was dressed entirely in white clothes.  A sabhã of munis, 
as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
72.2
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi said, “Mahãrãj, yesterday you had a very 
nice  talk  with  Dãdã  Khãchar.    All  of  us  very  much  wish  to  hear  that 
talk.” 
 
72.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If a bhakta of Bhagvãn has nishchay in 
Bhagvãn coupled  with  the  knowledge  of  His  greatness,  and  also 
thoroughly  realises  the  greatness  of  the sãdhus  and satsangis,  then 
even  if  that bhakta’s karmas  and kãl happen  to  be  unpleasant,  both 
kãl and karma combined  are  incapable  of  harming  him  due  to  the 
extreme  force  of  his bhakti.    On  the  other  hand,  a  person  lacking 
nishchay in Bhagvãn and His sant, does not benefit in any way, even if 
Bhagvãn wishes to do good for that person. 
 
72.4
 “A person who suppresses the humble, does not benefit in any way 
either.  In  fact,  Bhishma-Pitã  has  said  to  Yudhishthir  Rãjã  in  the 
Mahãbhãrat, ‘If you suppress the humble, you and your descendants 
will be burnt to ashes’.  Therefore, whether he is a bhakta of Bhagvãn 
or not, no humble person should even slightly be pained.  Moreover, 
if a person does hurt the humble, not only does he not benefit in any 
way,  but  he  also  incurs  a  sin  equivalent  to  the  sin  of  killing  a 
brãhman. 
 
72.5
 “In the same way, the sin incurred by making false allegations against 
someone   is   also   equivalent to   killing   a brãhman.      Even   if   the 
allegations  happen  to  be  true,  a  person  should  constructively  advise 
the person in private, but in no way should he be publicly humiliated. 
 
72.6
 “Similarly, a person who forces the five categories of women to lapse 
in  their dharma,  also  incurs  the  sin  of  killing  a brãhman.    What  are 
these  five categories  of  women?    First,  a  woman  who  has  sought  a 
person’s refuge; second, a person’s own wife who does not desire 
intimacy on days of vrat or on day of fasting; third, a woman who is a 

GADHADÃ I 
- 187 - 
pati-vratã wife;  fourth,  a  widow;  and  fifth,  a  women  who  has  placed 
her  trust  in  a  person.    If  a  person  commits  adultery  with  these  five 
categories of women, he incurs the sin of killing a brãhman.  Of these 
five categories, if a widow’s mind wavers  towards  immorality,  she 
should be inspired to follow dharma.” 
 
72.7
 The munis began  to  sing rasik kirtans of Bhagvãn.    Hearing  them, 
Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “When Bhagvãn assumes a body for the sake of 
the kalyãn of the jeevs, all of His actions are like those of humans.  On 
seeing  those  actions,  a bhakta of Bhagvãn understands  them  to  be 
charitras,  whereas  a vimukh or  a  weak-minded bhakta perceives 
avgun.    For  example,  when  Shukji  narrated  the rãs-leelã,  Parikshit 
Rãjã had a doubt, and so asked, ‘Bhagvãn had incarnated to establish 
the order of dharma.  Then, why did he commit a breach of dharma by 
associating with the wives of others?’  In this way, Parikshit perceived 
avgun in Bhagvãn. 
 
72.8
 Shukji,  on  the  other  hand,  thoughtfully  began  singing  praises  of 
Bhagvãn,  explaining  that Kãm-Dev has  conquered Brahmã and  other 
devs and  brought  them  under  his  control.    This  has  greatly  inflated 
Kãm-Dev’s arrogance.        To    vanquish    that    arrogance, Bhagvãn 
challenged Kãm-Dev.  Just as a powerful king gives his own weapons 
to  his  enemy  prior  to  fighting  him, Bhagvãn also  gave  his  enemy 
(Kãm-Dev), the necessary ‘ammunition’ for fighting.  What was that 
‘ammunition’?  Well, the force of Kãm-Dev is revealed in the company 
of  women,  and  that  force  is  also  greater  during  the  nights  of  the 
monsoon season.  In addition, romantic gestures of women, listening 
to   seductive   words,   seeing   the   beauty   of   women,   and   touching 
women, greatly increase the force of Kãm-Dev.  After giving all of this 
as ‘ammunition’ to Kãm-Dev, Shree Krishna Bhagvãn conquered Kãm-
Dev and continuously remained an urdhva-retã like a brahm-chãri.  In 
this   way,   he   vanquished Kãm-Dev’s arrogance.      No   one   except 
Bhagvãn possesses  such  magnificent  powers.    It  was  after  realising 
this  immense  power  of Bhagvãn that  Shukji  celebrated  the charitras 

GADHADÃ I 
- 188 - 
of Bhagvãn.  However, as Parikshit Rãjã failed to understand this, he 
perceived an avgun in Bhagvãn. 
 
72.9
 “However, someone may ask you, ‘Being paramhans, why do you sing 
such rasik kirtans?’  In that case, you should tell that person, ‘If we do 
not sing rasik kirtans, and instead perceive avgun in the rasik charitras 
of  Bhagvãn,  then  we  would  also  join  the  ranks  of  Parikshit  Rãjã  and 
other  nãstik  vimukhs.    However,  we  do  not  wish  to  join  the ranks  of 
vimukhs.    After  all, Shukji,  who  is  considered  to  be  the  guru  of  all 
paramhans,   himself   celebrated   the   rasik   charitras   of   Bhagvãn.  
Therefore, we must also certainly do the same’. 
 
72.10
 “Nevertheless, when Purushottam Bhagvãn, who is greater than both 
the  perishable  and  the  imperishable,  assumes  a  human svarup and 
travels  in  the brahmãnd for  the kalyãn of  the jeevs,  His charitras are 
just like those of all humans.  Just as humans possess mãyik svabhãvs 
such  as kãm, krodh, lobh, moh, mad,  matsar, irshyã, ãshã, trushnã, 
abhimãn,  defeat,  victory,  fear,  and  grief, Bhagvãn also  exhibits  the 
same svabhãvs  Himself.    However,  they  are  all  for  the kalyãn of  the 
jeevs.    So,  a  true bhakta celebrates  the charitras of Bhagvãn and 
attains Akshardhãm, whereas a vimukh perceives avgun in them. 
 
72.11
 “In fact, just as Bhagvãn is  the ãtmã of  the  perishable,  He  is  also  the 
ãtmã of Akshar-Brahm,  who  is  greater  than Prakruti and Purush.  
With His own powers, Bhagvãn supports both the perishable and the 
imperishable,    yet    He    Himself    is    distinct    from    them    both.  
Furthermore, the greatness of Bhagvãn is such that within the pore of 
His  each  and  every  hair,  countless  millions  of brahmãnds appear  as 
mere  atoms.    Only  when that  great Bhagvãn becomes  like  a  human 
for the sake of the kalyãn of the jeevs, do they have an opportunity to 
do  His sevã.    If  He  were  to  remain  exactly  the same  size  as  He  really 
is, then even the ruling devs of this brahmãnd, like Brahmã, would be 
incapable of having His darshan and performing His sevã.  Then, what 
can be said of mere humans? 

GADHADÃ I 
- 189 - 
72.12
 “Consider  the vadvãnal fire   that   dwells   in   the   ocean.      Despite 
consuming the waters of the ocean, it is so vast that even the water of 
the  ocean  cannot  extinguish  it.    If  we  wished  to  light  an  oil  lamp  in 
our homes and that vadvãnal fire were to enter our homes, instead of 
enjoying the light of the oil lamp, we would all be burnt and reduced 
to ashes.  However, if that same fire were to assume the form of an oil 
lamp, its light would provide joy, even though the oil lamp is the very 
same fire.  The oil lamp is so weak that it could be easily extinguished 
by  blowing  on  it  or smothering it  by  hand.    Nevertheless,  only it  can 
provide comfort to us, whereas the vadvãnal fire cannot. 
 
72.13
 “In the same way, Bhagvãn may  appear  to  be  as  powerless  as  a 
human,   but   only   through   that svarup can   countless jeevs attain 
kalyãn.    The jeevs are  incapable  of  even  doing darshan of  His murti, 
within  who’s  each  and  every  hair  reside   countless   millions   of 
brahmãnds.      This   makes kalyãn impossible   through   that murti.  
Therefore,  all charitras Bhagvãn performs  after  assuming  a  human 
murti are  worthy  of  being  celebrated.    A  person  should  not  doubt, 
‘Despite being Bhagvãn, why does He do this?’  In fact, to realise all of 
Bhagvãn’s charitras as kalyãn-kãri,  is  the  very dharma of  a bhakta.  
Only a person who understands this can be called a perfect bhakta of 
Bhagvãn.” 
 
72.14
 Kãkã-Bhãi,  of  the  village  Rojkã,  then  asked,  “What  are  the 
characteristics  of  a  person  who  merely  has nishchay in Bhagvãn, 
without realising His greatness?  Also, what are the characteristics of 
person  who  has nishchay in Bhagvãn coupled  with the  knowledge  of 
His greatness?” 
 
72.15
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A person with only nishchay still  has  the 
doubt, ‘Although I have attained Bhagvãn, will I attain kalyãn or not?’  
On   the   other   hand,   a   person   with nishchay coupled   with   the 
knowledge  of Bhagvãn’s greatness  believes, ‘From the very  day  I  had 
the  darshan  of  Bhagvãn,  my  kalyãn  has  been  guaranteed.    In  fact, 

GADHADÃ I 
- 190 - 
kalyãn  is  also  assured  to  anyone  who  devoutly  has  my  darshan  or 
accepts  my  advice.    Then,  how  can  there  be  any  doubt  regarding  my 
own kalyãn?  I am indeed absolutely fulfilled.  Furthermore, whichever 
spiritual activity I do perform, I perform solely to please Bhagvãn’.  A 
person  with  such  understanding  should  be  known  to  have nishchay 
in Bhagvãn coupled with the knowledge of His greatness.” 
 
72.16
 Again,  Kãkã-Bhãi asked, “What are the  characteristics  of  the  three 
types of bhaktas of Bhagvãn –uttam, madhyam, and kanishth?” 
 
72.17
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The uttam bhakta believes himself to be the 
ãtmã, and distinct from his body.  He does not associate the qualities 
of  the  body  (jad,  full  of  misery,  perishable,  impure)  with  the ãtmã, 
and  nor  does  he  associate  the  qualities  of  the ãtmã (achhedhya, 
abhedhya, avinãshi)  with the  body.    He  sees  the jeevãtmã residing  in 
his  body,  as  well  as  the Paramãtmã dwelling  within  his ãtmã.    Not 
only  that,  he  sees  the ãtmãs residing  in  the  bodies  of  the  others  as 
well.   Despite having  become  so skilled,  he  realises Bhagvãn and  His 
sant to  be  superior  to ãtmã-nishthã,  and  does  not  have  even  the 
slightest pride in the fact that he has attained ãtmã-nishthã.  A person 
with such characteristics is said to be an uttam bhakta. 
 
72.18
 “In  comparison,  a  person  who  becomes  jealous  of bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn,  despite  having  knowledge  of  the ãtmã and nishchay in 
Bhagvãn,  should  be  considered  to  be madhyam bhakta.    If Bhagvãn 
were  to  insult  this  person,  he  develops  jealousy  towards Bhagvãn, 
and feels, ‘Even though Bhagvãn is so great, why is He treating me this 
way, despite no fault of my own?’  
 
72.19
 “Finally, a person who has nishchay in Bhagvãn but no ãtmã-nishthã, 
has  love  for Bhagvãn as  well  as  for  the  affairs  of  this  world,  and 
experiences  joy  and  grief  in  the  affairs  of  this  world,  should  be 
considered to be a kanishth bhakta.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 72 || 72 || 

GADHADÃ I 
- 191 - 
Gadhadã I – 73 
Conquering Lust 
The World’s Greatest Brahm-Chãri 
 
73.1
 In the Samvat year 1876, on the night of Chaitra vad Amãs [12
th
 April, 
1820], Swãmi Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on the veranda 
outside  the  north-facing room of His residence in Dãdã Khãchar’s 
darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  wearing  a  white khes and  had  covered 
Himself with a white chãdar.  He had also tied a white feto around His 
head.    At  that  time,  four  senior sãdhus,  including  Muktãnand  Swãmi, 
and some fifty other haribhaktas, had gathered before Him. 
 
73.2
 Then, Gopãlãnand Swãmi asked, “What is the nature of lust?” 
 
73.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “Semen alone is the nature of lust.” 
 
73.4
 Gopãlãnand Swãmi then raised a doubt, “Semen is one of the seven 
basic  constituents  of  the  body – the  seven  basic  constituents  of  the 
body  are: ras  (bodily  fluids),  rakta  (blood),  mãns  (muscle),  med  (fat), 
asthi  (bones),  majjã  (marrow),  and  shukra  (semen).    Then,  how  can 
semen  alone  be  called  the  nature  of  lust?    Also,  how  exactly  is  that 
semen produced?” 
 
73.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “The mind resides in the mano-vahã nãdi.  
Whenever  a  thought  related  to  women  arises  in  the  mind,  semen  is 
churned from the body, and after collecting in the mano-vahã nãdi, it 
is  discharged  through  the  genitals – just  as ghee surfaces  from 
yoghurt when it is churned by a churning rod.  A person whose semen 
is  not  discharged  through  the  genitals  is  known  as  an urdhva-retã 
and  a  perfect brahm-chãri.    When Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn associated 
with  the gopis during  the rãs-leelã,  he did not  allow  the  discharge of 
semen.    For  this  reason,  he  was  known  as  an urdhva-retã brahm-
chãri,  and  had  therefore  conquered  lust.    Therefore,  semen  alone  is 
the   nature   of   lust.      A   person   who   has   conquered   semen,   has 
conquered lust.” 

GADHADÃ I 
- 192 - 
73.6
 Gopãlãnand Swãmi asked again, “When the body is burnt after death, 
its  seven  constituents  are  burnt  along  with  it.    Therefore,  if  semen 
alone  is  the  nature  of  lust,  then  by  the  burning  of  semen  along  with 
the  body,  lust should  also  be  burnt.    Why  then,  does  lust  arise  when 
the jeev enters another body?” 
 
73.7
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Semen is retained in the sukshma body.  
Moreover,  it  is  because  of  the sukshma body  that  the sthul body  is 
produced.    When  a  ghost,  which  is  mainly  composed  of  a sukshma 
body, enters into the sthul body of another man and associates with a 
woman,  that  woman  conceives  a  child  by  that  ghost.    Therefore, 
semen is definitely retained in the sukshma body.” 
 
73.8
 Gopãlãnand Swãmi questioned further, “Shivji was  an urdhva-retã, 
yet  on  seeing Mohini,  semen  was  discharged.    This  implies  that  as 
long  as  there  is  semen  in  the  body,  it  is  sure  to  be  discharged 
whenever  a  man  associates  with  a  woman  in  the jãgrat state  or 
svapna state.  So then, as long as there is semen in the body, how can 
a person be called a perfect brahm-chãri?” 
 
73.9
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “That can be said to be a fault in Shivji’s 
yogic powers.    A  person  whose  semen  is  discharged  in  the jãgrat 
state  or svapna state  by  the  thought  of  a  woman,  cannot  be  called  a 
true brahm-chãri.    That  is  why  in  this  whole  world, Nar-Nãrãyan 
Rushi is  the  only  one  who  has  firm brahm-chãrya.    Since  we  have 
accepted  the  refuge  of  that Nar-Nãrãyan Rushi,  by  his  grace  and  by 
worshipping   him,   we   shall   also   gradually   become nishkãmi and 
perfect brahm-chãris like Him. 
 
73.10
 “Yogis try  to  burn  the  semen,  which  remains  in  the  body,  with  great 
effort.    However, Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn maintained  perfect brahm-
chãrya, even in the midst of the company of women.  Such powers are 
only   present   in Bhagvãn.      No   one else  is  capable   of   remaining 
uninfluenced  in  this  way.    Therefore,  other yogis should  make  an 

GADHADÃ I 
- 193 - 
effort  to  avoid  thinking  of  women  in  both  the jãgrat state  and  the 
svapna state.” 
 
73.11
 Shuk  Muni  then  asked,  “In  Dvãrikã, Shree   Krishna Bhagvãn had 
16,108  wives.    It  is  said  that  He  had  ten  sons  and  one  daughter  by 
each wife.  How should one understand this?” 
 
73.12
 Shreeji Mahãrãj clarified, “The incidents of Dvãrikã are one thing, and 
then incidents of Vraj are another.  In Dvãrikã, Shree Krishna Bhagvãn 
had  adopted  the  philosophy  of  Sãnkhya.    A  follower  of  the  Sãnkhya 
philosophy  believes  his  own  self  to  be  distinct  from  the  mind,  body, 
and indriyas.    While  performing  all  actions,  he  does  not  regard 
himself  as  being  the  doer  of  those  actions,  nor  does  he  experience 
either joy or grief from those actions.  That was the principle adopted 
by Shree    Krishna Bhagvãn.        Therefore,    He    was    said    to    be 
uninfluenced.    The  Sãnkhya  philosophy  adopted  by Shree  Krishna 
Bhagvãn in Dvãrikã is the very same Sãnkhya philosophy followed by 
kings such as Janak, who worshipped Bhagvãn as grahasthas.  In the 
same  way, Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn was  also  a grahastha,  and  was 
known  as  the  king  of  Dvãrikã.    Therefore,  because  He  followed  the 
Sãnkhya philosophy, he remained uninfluenced as well. 
 
73.13
 “However, in Vrundãvan Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn had  adopted  the 
philosophy   of Yog,   by  which   He  maintained   His   vow  of   perfect 
brahm-chãrya,  despite  associating  with  women.    At  that  time,  He 
displayed  the  powers  of Nar-Nãrãyan Rushi within  Himself.    In  the 
Shreemad  Bhãgvat, Kapil-Dev explains  to  Devhuti, ‘No one, except 
Nar-Nãrãyan  Rushi,  is  capable  of  overcoming  my  mãyã  in  the  form  of 
women’.  However, Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn conquered  lust  while 
associating with women. 
 
73.14
 “Now, consider the following incident: When Durvãsã Rushi came 
and Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn began  sending  all  the gopis with  dishes 

GADHADÃ I 
- 194 - 
filled  with  food  for  him,  the gopis asked, ‘How shall we cross the 
Yamunãji River?’ 
 
73.15
 “At that time, Shree Krishna Bhagvãn said, ‘Tell Yamunãji that if Shree 
Krishna  is  forever  a  brahm-chãri, then make way for us’.  When  the 
gopis said this to Yamunãji, she made way for them. 
 
73.16
 “After feeding Durvãsã Rushi, all the gopis asked him, ‘Yamunãji is in 
our way.  How shall we return home?’ 
 
73.17
 “Durvãsã Rushi then asked, ‘How did you come?’ 
 
73.18
 “The gopis explained, ‘We told Yamunãji  that  if  Shree Krishna  is 
forever a brahm-chãri, then make way for us.  So she made way for us.  
But how shall we return home now?’ 
 
73.19
 “Durvãsã  Rushi  then  said, ‘Tell Yamunãji that if Durvãsã Rushi is 
forever fasting, then make way for us’.  When  the gopis said  this  to 
Yamunãji,  she  made  way  for  them.    Seeing  this,  the gopis were 
extremely  surprised.    However,  they  were  unable  to  realise  the 
greatness of Shree Krishna Bhagvãn or Durvãsã Rushi. 
 
73.20
 “Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn played  with  the gopis while  maintaining  His 
vow  of  perfect brahm-chãrya and  was  therefore  still  a brahm-chãri.  
Durvãsã  Rushi also  united  his ãtmã with Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn,  the 
ãtmã of  all,  and  although  he  ate  all  the  food  offered  by  the gopis,  he 
was  still  forever  fasting.    This  was  because  in  reality,  he  had  fed  all 
the  food  to Bhagvãn.    Therefore,  the  actions  of  the  extremely  great 
cannot be understood. 
 
73.21
 “If a person looks for followers of the Sãnkhya philosophy, he could 
find  thousands.    However,  to  be  an urdhva-retã by  way  of yogic 
powers,  is  only  possible  for Nar-Nãrãyan.    In  addition,  a  true bhakta 
of Nar-Nãrãyan can also gradually develop firm brahm-chãrya by the 
power of his worship, but others cannot. 

GADHADÃ I 
- 195 - 
73.22
 “Furthermore, if semen is discharged through the genitals in the 
jãgrat state or svapna state, a person cannot be called a brahm-chãri.  
Nevertheless, a person who follows the eight types of tyãg of women 
is walking on the path of brahm-chãrya.  So with time, by the grace of 
Nar-Nãrãyan, he will gradually become a firm brahm-chãri. 
 
73.23
 “When I was young, I had heard that semen is also released through a 
person’s sweat.  So in order to retain my semen, I learnt two types of 
jal-basti,  and  also kunjar-kriyã.    In  order  to  conquer  lust,  I  learnt 
many yogic ãsans as well.  When I slept at night, I slept in the posture 
of gorakh-ãsan to prevent the discharge of semen even in the svapna 
state.    To  conquer  lust,  I  made  such  an  effort  that  my  body  stopped 
sweating, and I no longer felt either the cold or the heat.  Then, when 
I  came  to  Rãmãnand  Swãmi,  he  tried  to  make  me  sweat  by  pasting 
ãval leaves  all  over  my  body.    Even  then,  my  body  would  not  sweat.  
Therefore,   conquering   lust   is   the   most   difficult   of   all   spiritual 
activities.  However, a person who has the firm strength of upãsanã of 
Bhagvãn’s svarup,  has  become  absolutely  free  from  desires  for  the 
five vishays, and is firm in remaining free of worldly desires, becomes 
free of lust by the grace of Bhagvãn.” 
 
73.24
 Nityãnand Swãmi then asked, “What is the method of becoming free 
of worldly desires?  Is it listening to talks, or is it vairãgya?” 
 
73.25
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Vairãgya alone  cannot  last; it  is  eventually 
destroyed.    Therefore,  after  developing  knowledge  of  the ãtmã and 
complete gnãn of Bhagvãn’s svarup,  a  person  should  think, ‘I am the 
ãtmã and sachidãnand, whereas the body and the brahmãnd are mãyik 
and perishable.  How can they compare to me?  Moreover, my ishta-dev 
is  Purushottam  Bhagvãn,  who  is  greater  than  even  Akshar,  and  is  the 
supporter of countless millions of brahmãnds.  I have the firm refuge of 
that Bhagvãn’.  Vairãgya developed from these thoughts, is said to be 
coupled  with gnãn.    It  is  this vairãgya that  is  never  destroyed.    For 
example, a burning flame is extinguished when water is poured over 
it.    However,  the vadvãnal fire,  which  rests  in  the  ocean,  cannot  be 

GADHADÃ I 
- 196 - 
extinguished   even   by   the   waters   of   the   ocean   itself.      Similarly, 
vairãgya coupled  with gnãn is  like  the vadvãnal fire  and  the  fire  of 
lightning – it cannot be extinguished.  Without that gnãn, other forms 
of vairãgya cannot be trusted. 
 
73.26
 “My vairãgya is like that of the fire of lightning and the vadvãnal fire.  
This  nature  of  mine  is  known  by  those  who  have  stayed  extremely 
close  to me.    However,  those  who  remain  far  from me,  are  unable  to 
realise my nature.  Furthermore, this Mulji Brahm-Chãri may appear 
to  be  naïve,  yet  he  thoroughly  knows  my  nature,  and  understands, 
‘Mahãrãj is as distant as ãkãsh.  He has no prejudices against or in 
favour of anyone’.  Also,  because  he  knows  my  nature,  he  possesses 
qualities  like  those  of Bhagvãn.    Moreover,  the antaryãmi Bhagvãn 
residing  within  all,  explains  to  the  minds  of  all  men  and  women, 
‘There is no fault whatsoever in this Brahm-Chari’. 
 
73.27
 “The means of acquiring such great qualities is as follows:  Whoever 
believes  a  great sant to  be  absolutely  free  of  flaws  becomes  totally 
flawless himself.  However, if a person perceives flaws in a great sant, 
that person’s intellect becomes polluted, and inner enemies, like kãm 
and krodh, all come to dwell within his heart.  As a result, the heart of 
that person who perceives faults in the sat-purush is greatly troubled 
by  disturbing  thoughts.    Although  he  may  practice satsang,  he  never 
stops being unhappy. 
 
73.28
 “Those who are wise, realise all my characteristics by staying close to 
me.  They realise, ‘Mahãrãj has no affection for any object in this world 
that  can  awaken infatuation,  such  as  wealth,  women,  jewellery,  food, 
and drink.  In fact, Mahãrãj remains distant from all these things.  Also, 
when  He  allows  someone  to  sit  near  Him  or  talks  to  him  of  gnãn,  it  is 
purely out of compassion for the kalyãn of the jeev’.  On the other hand, 
those   who   are   fools,   whether   they   stay   near   or   far,   cannot 
understand my nature. 
73.29
 “These talks can only be understood by a person who has ãtmã-
nishthã, who offers bhakti to Bhagvãn while holding His murti within 

GADHADÃ I 
- 197 - 
the ãtmã,  and  who  does  not  abandon  the  worship  of Bhagvãn even 
after becoming brahm-rup.  Therefore, after developing ãtmã-nishthã 
and  understanding  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn’s murti,  no  desire  for 
any  objects  remains.    Once  worldly  desires  are  eradicated,  a  person 
may  experience  pain  and pleasure  according  to  the prãrabdha of  his 
body, but the indriyas no longer remain sharp. 
 
73.30
 “The indriyas are  the  jagged  edges  of  the manomay chakra.    They 
become  blunt  only  by  the  complete  understanding  of brahm and 
Parbrahm.  For  example,  if  a  person,  whose  teeth  have  become  very 
sensitive as a result of sucking lemons, has to chew some chick-peas, 
he would never be able to chew them.  If he was extremely hungry, he 
would at most swallow them, but he would be unable to chew them.  
Similarly,  a  person  who  has  thoroughly  understood  the  greatness  of 
Bhagvãn and   the ãtmã,   feels   no   joy   whatsoever   in   any   of   the 
pleasures  of  the vishays of  any dhãm.    While  the prãrabdha of  the 
body continues, he may indulge in food, drink, and other objects, but 
he would do so in the same way as the person with sensitised teeth, 
swallowing whole chick-peas. 
 
73.31
 “To eradicate worldly desires is indeed an extremely difficult task.  In 
fact,  they  remain  even  after  mastering samãdhi.    After  attaining 
samãdhi, there is no way a person can return back into his body from 
the svarup of brahm.    If  he  does  return,  it  is  because  of  one  of  three 
reasons.    Firstly,  he  returns  to  his  body  from samãdhi if  he  holds 
desires  for  worldly  pleasures.    Secondly,  if  someone  is  extremely 
powerful, he can enter into samãdhi and return to the body according 
to his own will.  Lastly, if there is another person who is much more 
powerful,  then  that  person  can  bring  someone  back  into  their  body 
from samãdhi.    These  are  the  three ways  of  returning  to  the  body 
from samãdhi. 
 
73.32
 “When samãdhi occurs,  a  person  has  the darshan of Brahm and  sees 
the divine light of Brahm to be like that of countless millions of suns.  
At  that  time,  if  that  person  does  not  have  much  understanding,  he 

GADHADÃ I 
- 198 - 
regards the murti of pratyaksha Purushottam Bhagvãn to be inferior, 
and  believes Brahm to  be  superior.    This  leads  to  committing  a 
breach of upãsanã.  That is why firm nishchay should be developed in 
the pratyaksha murti,    because    only    then    can    all    things be 
accomplished.    I  am  also  determined  that  I  shall  not  allow  any  flaw 
whatsoever  to  remain  in  anyone  who  sincerely  surrenders  his  mind 
to  me.    Therefore,  I  shall  not  allow  even  a  little  distance  to  remain 
between us.” 
 
73.33
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “What  are  the  characteristics  of  a 
person    who    has    surrendered    his    mind,    and    what    are    the 
characteristics of a person who has not surrendered his mind?” 
 
73.34
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If a person, who has surrendered his mind 
to Bhagvãn,  is  unable  to  be  present  while  the  talks  of Bhagvãn are 
going  on,  or  for  the darshan of Bhagvãn,  he  experiences  intense 
regret in his heart.  Whenever he listens to the talks of Bhagvãn and 
has   the darshan of Bhagvãn,   his   love   for Bhagvãn continually 
increases,  but  never  does  his  mind  recede  from  those  talks  and 
darshan.  Moreover, when Bhagvãn gives an ãgnã to someone to stay 
far  away,  a  person  who  has  surrendered  his  mind  would  think  to 
himself, ‘If that ãgnã was given to me, I would gladly go to Buranpur or 
Kãshi,  or  anywhere else for that matter’.  A  person,  who  remains 
happy  living  according  to  the  wishes  of Bhagvãn in  this  way,  is  near 
to me; even if he is a thousand miles away. 
 
73.35
 “On the other hand, a person who has not surrendered his mind in 
this  way,  is  as  good as  being  hundreds  of  thousands  of  miles  away, 
even though he may be staying very close to me.  In fact, I am afraid 
of  even  giving  advice  to  a  person  who has  not surrendered his mind 
to  me,  as  I  fear ‘Will he accept it positively or negatively?’  These  are 
the  characteristics  of  a  person  who  has  surrendered  his  mind  and 
who has not surrendered his mind.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 73 || 73 || 

GADHADÃ I 
- 199 - 
Gadhadã I – 74 
Satsang Flourishes Or Declines By The Wish Of Nar-Nãrãyan 
 
74.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on the  morning  of Vaishãkh sud 11  [24
th
 
April,  1820],  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a 
decorated  bedstead  under  the  neem  tree  opposite  the mandir of 
Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan, in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He 
was  dressed  entirely  in  white clothes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
74.2
  Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “The extent of a person’s vairãgya and 
understanding, can be measured only when he encounters vishays, or 
in  times  of  hardship,  but  not  otherwise.    That  being  so,  what  can  be 
said   about   situations   of   extreme   happiness   or   hardship?      For 
example,  everyone  must  have  realised  the  state  of  their  own antah-
karans during   the   minor   difficulty   that   recently   fell   upon   Dãdã 
Khãchar.” 
 
74.3
 Muktãnand Swãmi then said, “It is natural that in a person’s heart, he 
sides with Bhagvãn’s bhaktas, with the understanding that if satsang 
flourishes,  many  people  will  benefit;  but  if  the satsang suffers  a 
setback in any way, no one will benefit.  That is why joy and grief are 
experienced.” 
 
74.4
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj said, “Since  we are  the dãs of Nar-Nãrãyan,  we 
should be pleased with whatever pleases Him.  If it is the wish of Nar-
Nãrãyan,  then  our satsang will  flourish;  and  if  He  wishes  to  make  it 
decrease,  then  it  will  decrease.    Also,  if Nar-Nãrãyan seats  us  on  an 
elephant,  we  should  be  happy;  and  if  He  seats  us  on  a  donkey,  then 
we should also remain happy.  We should not have the slightest love 
for anything except the holy feet of Nar-Nãrãyan.  If there is a person 
who’s mind is attached to just a minor responsibility, then what will 
become of him if he is given the major responsibility of taking care of 
the whole world? 

GADHADÃ I 
- 200 - 
74.5
 “For this reason, our lord, Shree Nar-Nãrãyan,  performs tap while 
sitting under a bordi tree; and He does not touch anything that gives 
worldly pleasures.  That is why we are the dãs of our lord, Shree Nar-
Nãrãyan.  Just as a pati-vratã wife keeps jewellery, clothes, and food, 
less  than  her  husband,  we  should  keep  less  worldly  pleasures  than 
our Shree Nar-Nãrãyan.  
 
74.6
 “If a bhakta wishes great things for Bhagvãn, it is fine if he has these 
wishes  while  doing bhakti,  and  if  he  is nishkãmi.    The bhakta should 
not wish these objects for himself.  Bhagvãn is not at all interested in 
the  enjoyment  of  these  worldly  objects  for  Himself,  but  He  sees  the 
bhakti of the bhakta, and accepts the objects given by them.  
 
74.7
 “Bhagvãn is  the  master  of  millions  of  universes,  and  the  master  of 
Brahmpur, Golok,  and Vaikunth,  and  other dhãms,  and  the  master  of 
Rãdhikãji and Lakshmiji.    If Bhagvãn desired  worldly  objects  and 
enjoyments,  why  would  He  abandon  all  these  things  and  sit  under  a 
bordi tree to perform tap?  Therefore, Bhagvãn can have no desire for 
worldly pleasures.  In comparison to other avatãrs, our Nar-Nãrãyan 
is a greater tyãgi, and performs tap for the kalyãn of jeevs. 
 
74.8
 “If Nar-Nãrãyan has desires for worldly objects, then why does He eat 
berries  and  sit  under  a  tree?    There  are  many  foolish  souls  in  the 
world  who  are  owners  of  land.    If Nar-Nãrãyan,  who  is Bhagvãn, 
wanted some wealth and worldly pleasures, then should He not keep 
at  least  a  few  villages  for  His  own  use?    However, Bhagvãn does  not 
want  anything.    Therefore,  we  should  become  a  greater tyãgi than 
our master.  
 
74.9
 “In whatever way satsang flourishes  by  the  wish  of Bhagvãn,  we 
should  remain  joyful.    If  it  is  the  wish  of Bhagvãn,  then  the  whole 
world  will  become satsangis;  or  if  He  so  wishes,  then satsang will 
decline.    But,  under  no  condition, should  we  have  grief  of  joy  in  our 
minds.  Whatever occurs is due to the actions of Bhagvãn.  So, just as 

GADHADÃ I 
- 201 - 
a dry leaf blows in the air according to the direction of the wind, we 
should  remain  with Bhagvãn and  worship  him,  and  never  let  any 
unhappiness enter our minds.”     
     
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 74 || 74 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 75 
Redeeming Seventy-One Generations 
 
75.1
 In the Samvat year 1876, on Vaishãkh vad 11 [8
th
 May, 1820], Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead 
under the neem tree in front of the mandir of Shree Vãsudev-Nãrãyan 
in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  wearing  a  garland  of 
yellow  flowers  around  His  neck,  and  was dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from various places, 
had gathered before Him. 
 
75.2
 Surã Khãchar then asked, “It is said that seventy-one generations of a 
family,  which  consists  of  a bhakta of Bhagvãn,  attain kalyãn.    But, 
many in that family may even be enemies of Bhagvãn and His sant.  In 
what way do they attain kalyãn?” 
 
75.3 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  answered,  “Devhuti  had  profound  love  towards 
Kardam Rushi as her husband, yet she attained kalyãn because of her 
love  for  him.    The  fifty  daughters  of  Mandhãtã  Rãjã  who  married 
Saubhari  Rushi,  were  attracted  to  him  because  of  his  handsome 
appearance.    Although  their  love  for  Saubhari  was  born  out  of  lust, 
they still all attained kalyãn like Saubhari Rushi himself.  Therefore, if 
all  the  members  of  a  family,  in  which  there  is  a bhakta,  believe ‘We 
are indeed very fortunate to have a bhakta of Bhagvãn in our family’, 
and  keep  love  for  the bhakta with  such  an  understanding  of  his 
greatness, then all the members of the family will attain kalyãn.  Even 
if  the bhakta’s ancestors, who have died and have gone to Svarg, 
realise ‘We are indeed very fortunate to have a bhakta of Bhagvãn in 

GADHADÃ I 
- 202 - 
our  family’,  and  they  also  keep  love  for  the bhakta,  then  those 
ancestors will attain kalyãn as well. 
 
75.4
 “However, a person who keeps hatred towards a bhakta of Bhagvãn, 
does  not  attain kalyãn.    As  his  hatred  towards  the bhakta increases, 
his mind becomes more and more polluted.  In fact, when he dies, he 
falls into  the  same  pit of Narak as  that  entered  by  a  person  who has 
committed the five great sins.  Therefore, all those who have love for 
a bhakta of Bhagvãn, regardless of whether they are family members 
or not, attain kalyãn.” 
 
75.5
 Then,  Nãjã  Bhakta asked, “Suppose there is one bhakta of Bhagvãn 
with firm nishchay, and another with only a little nishchay.  Although 
outwardly   they   both   appear   to   be   good,   how   can   the   two   be 
recognised?” 
 
75.6
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “A person who has precise gnãn of  the 
nature of the ãtmã, firm vairãgya, and perfect bhakti and svadharma, 
should be known to have perfect nishchay.  Even if one of these four 
factors  is  lacking,  then  despite having nishchay,  it  is  still  without  the 
knowledge  of Bhagvãn’s greatness.    If  all  four  factors  are  totally 
present,  then  that  should  be  known  as nishchay in Bhagvãn coupled 
with the knowledge of His greatness.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 75 || 75 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 76 
A Person With Krodh, Irshyã, Kapat, And Mãn 
 
76.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on sud 11  of  the  first Jyeshth [23
rd
 May, 
1820],   Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   seated   in   His 
residence in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed 
entirely  in  white  clothes.    At  that  time,  some  senior sãdhus  were 
seated before Him. 

GADHADÃ I 
- 203 - 
76.2
 Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “There are four types of people I do not get 
along  with, even  if  they  happen  to  be bhaktas of Bhagvãn:    A  person 
with krodh,  a  person  with irshyã,  a  person  with kapat,  and  a  person 
with abhimãn.    Of  these,  both krodh and irshyã are  dependent  on 
abhimãn.  Furthermore, I can never believe a person with kãm to be a 
satsangi.  In fact, even if such a person happens to be in satsang, he is 
as good as a vimukh. 
 
76.3
  “A true satsangi is a person who has absolutely no flaws in following 
the panch-vartmãn,  and  who  remains  totally  undisturbed  until  the 
end of his life, regardless of whatever strict commands I may impose, 
and  force  him  to  abandon  his  preferences  and  enforce  my  own.    I 
effortlessly  and  naturally  develop  love  for  such  a bhakta.    On  the 
other   hand,   I   cannot   develop   love   for   a bhakta without   these 
qualities,  even  if  I  try.    This  is  because  my  nature  is  such  that  I  can 
only  develop  love  for  a  person  who  possesses  perfect bhakti for 
Bhagvãn in his heart.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 76 || 76 || 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 77 
Not Invalidating Dharma Under The Excuse Of Gnãn 
 
77.1
 In the Samvat year 1876, on vad Amãs of the second Jyeshth [10
th
 July, 
1820], Swãmi Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  west-facing  rooms  in  front  of 
the mandir of Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Gadhadã.  He was dressed entirely in white clothes.  A sabhã of munis, 
as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
77.2
 In   the sabhã,   the munis were   engaged   in   a   question-answer 
discussion amongst themselves.  During the discussion, a muni, out of 
misunderstanding,  began  to  invalidate dharma on  the  basis  of  his 
nishchay in Bhagvãn. 

GADHADÃ I 
- 204 - 
 
77.3
 Hearing this, Shreeji Mahãrãj commented, “A person  who  abandons 
dharma under   the   excuse   of   the gnãn of Bhagvãn,   should   be 
considered   to   be   demonic.      The svarup of Bhagvãn possesses 
countless kalyãn-kãri qualities,   which Pruthvi has   described   to 
Dharma in  the  first skandh of  the  Shreemad  Bhãgvat.    Therefore,  a 
person   who   has   accepted   the   refuge  of Bhagvãn acquires   these 
kalyãn-kãri qualities.      Moreover,   a   person   who   has nishchay in 
Bhagvãn also acquires the thirty characteristics of a sãdhu described 
in the eleventh skandh of the Shreemad Bhãgvat.  Therefore, a person 
who does not possess the thirty characteristics of a sãdhu should not 
be considered to be a true sãdhu.   
 
77.4
 “Conversely, a person who does have nishchay in Bhagvãn definitely 
does  acquire  the kalyãn-kãri qualities  of Bhagvãn within  his  heart.  
When  these  qualities  of Bhagvãn are  acquired  by  a sãdhu,  he  also 
acquires  the  thirty  characteristics  of  a sãdhu.    From  today  onwards, 
whoever abandons dharma (panch-vartmãn), and solely supports the 
strength  of bhakti or gnãn,  is  a  blasphemer  of the guru and guru’s 
word.    Anyone  who  even  talks  of  such  a  lapse  in dharma should  be 
called  a vimukh and  told, ‘You have sided with demons, and we shall 
not accept it’.  With such words, the talks of that sinful person should 
be dismissed.” 
 
77.5
 A sant then asked, “Mahãrãj, there may be an extremely faithful 
bhakta of Bhagvãn who   suffers   great   pain   and   who   babbles 
meaninglessly  at  the  time  of  death,  whereas  a  person  who  does  not 
seem to be a true bhakta appears extremely composed at the time of 
his  death.    In  fact,  he  dies  in  comfort,  realising  the glory  of Bhagvãn, 
and  even  expressing  His  greatness.    What  is  the  reason  behind  this?  
Please  explain  why  a  religious  person’s  death  appears  to  be 
unpleasant in comparison to an ordinary person’s death that appears 
to be pleasant?” 
 
77.6
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “A person’s mind is influenced by the 
eight  factors  of desh, kãl, kriyã, sang, dhyãn, mantra, dikshã,  and 

GADHADÃ I 
- 205 - 
shãstra.  If these eight factors are pure, the mind becomes pure; but, 
if they are impure, the mind becomes impure.  
 
77.7
 “Also, Bhagvãn’s mãyã inspires  the dharmas of  the  four yugs to 
prevail in turn within a person’s heart.  At the time of death, if the 
dharma of Satya-Yug is  prevalent,  then  death  appears  very  pleasant.  
If  the dharma of  either Tretã-Yug or Dvãpar-Yug is  prevalent,  then 
death appears less pleasant.  However, when the dharma of Kali-Yug 
is  prevalent,  death  appears  extremely  unpleasant.    In  this  way,  the 
pleasantness and unpleasantness of death is also determined by kãl. 
 
77.8
 “The three  mental  states – jãgrat, svapna,  and sushupti – are  also 
factors.  At the time of death, if the jãgrat state is prevalent, then even 
a  sinner  would  die  while  still  completely  conscious.    If  the svapna 
state  is  prevalent  at  the  time  of  death,  then  a  person  dies  mumbling 
without    making    sense,    even    if    he    is    a bhakta of Bhagvãn.  
Furthermore,  if  the sushupti state  is  prevalent  at  the  time  of  death, 
then  regardless  of  whether  a  person  is  a bhakta of Bhagvãn or  a 
vimukh,   he   passes   away   unconsciously,   unable   to   say   anything, 
neither  good  nor  bad.    However,  if  a  person  dies  while  thoroughly 
realising his jeevãtmã as greater than these three states and as being 
brahm-rup,  he  passes  away  displaying  all  the  powers  of Bhagvãn.  
Passing away after becoming brahm-rup and displaying such powers, 
is  only  possible  for bhaktas of Bhagvãn.    It  is  not  possible  for  any 
vimukh.      In   this   way, Kãl, as   well   as   the   three   mental   states, 
determines the pleasantness and unpleasantness present at the time 
of death.   
 
77.9
 “However, even if a vimukh dies  speaking  normally,  with  the jãgrat 
state  being  prevalent,  that  does  not  imply  in  any  way  that  he  will 
attain kalyãn.      Regardless   of   whether   he   dies   pleasantly   or 
unpleasantly,  he  will  go  only  to Narak.    Conversely,  regardless  of 
whether  a bhakta of Bhagvãn speaks  normally,  babbles  without 
making  sense,  or  remains  silent  at  the  time  of  death,  he  definitely 
attains kalyãn.  There is no doubt whatsoever in this fact.  All bhaktas 

GADHADÃ I 
- 206 - 
of Bhagvãn should   realise   this.      Although   a bhakta of Bhagvãn 
appears   to   be   suffering   pain   when   passing   away,   he   actually 
experiences great bliss within due to the grace of Bhagvãn.  So, even 
if  at  the  time  of  his  death  a bhakta passes  away  babbling  without 
making sense, there should be no doubts at all regarding his kalyãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 77 || 77|| 
 
 
Gadhadã I – 78 
The Affect Of Desh, Kãl, Kriyã, And Sang 
 
78.1
 In  the Samvat year  1876,  on Ashãdh sud 3  [13
th
 July,  1820],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  the  veranda  outside  the 
west-facing rooms in front of the mandir of Shree Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in 
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  wearing  a  white khes, 
and had covered Himself with a white chãdar.  He was also wearing a 
white pãgh on  His  head  and  a  garland  of  white  flowers  around  His 
neck.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places, 
had gathered before Him. 
 
78.2
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “All sant,  please  listen.    I  wish to  ask  a 
question.” 
 
78.3
 The sants responded, “Please ask, Mahãrãj.” 
   
78.4
 Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “If the eight influences of desh, kãl, kriyã, sang, 
mantra, dhyãn, dikshã,   and shãstras are   pleasant,   they   purify   a 
person’s mind.  However, if these eight influences are unpleasant, 
they pollute a person’s mind.  But, do the sanskãrs of  the karmas 
performed in past lives have any influence on these eight factors?” 
 
78.5
 The munis answered, “It seems that the karmas of past lives do play a 
role.  If a person’s past karmas are  pleasant,  he  is born  in  a  pleasant 
desh.    However,  if  the  past karmas are  unpleasant,  he  is  born  in  an 

GADHADÃ I 
- 207 - 
unpleasant desh.    In  the  same  way,  the  other  seven  factors  are  also 
determined by past karmas.  Therefore, past karmas appear to play a 
major  role  in  all  of  them.    The  eight  influences  may  be  predominant 
in  certain  circumstances,  but  past karmas are  predominant  in  all 
circumstances.” 
 
78.6
 Shreeji   Mahãrãj   then   questioned,  “From  what  principle  in  the 
shãstras do  you  claim  that  past karmas play  the  predominant  role 
among all the eight influences?  Please quote any reference from the 
shãstras.  After all, only in the Jain shãstras, and not in any other, does 
a  person  find  the  predominance  of  only karmas.    Other shãstras 
explain  only  the  predominance  of  the sang of Bhagvãn and  His 
bhaktas.    Moreover,  because  you  support  the  predominance  of  only 
past karmas, are you truly nãstiks superficially disguised as satsangis, 
or  what?    This  is  because  no  one  except  the nãstiks promote  the 
predominance  of karmas.    They  believe  the  Veds,  the shãstras,  the 
Purãns, and the Mahãbhãrat, and other historical shãstras, to be false.  
They only accept their own shãstras, written in the Mãgdhi dialect, as 
authentic.    Therefore,  it  is  only  out  of  foolishness  that  they  only 
promote past karmas. 
 
78.7
 “If the eight influences vary according to past karmas,  then  why  has 
the  hundred-feet-deep  underground  water not  risen  to  the  surface 
for  the  many  religious  kings  who  have  been  born  in  the  region  of 
Marvad?  If the influence of desh was controlled by past karmas, then 
the  water-table  should  rise  for  people  who  have  performed  good 
deeds,  and  fall  for  sinners.    However,  this  is  not  the  case,  because  in 
the  region  of  Marvad,  both  sinners  and  religious  people  suffer  from 
the problem of water being found deep underground.  In reality, each 
desh does  not  lose  its  natural  characteristics.    Therefore,  the  eight 
influences do not vary according to past karmas. 
 
78.8
 “Therefore, a person who desires his own kalyãn should  not  uphold 
the  predominance  of karmas  in  the  way  that nãstiks do.    If  the  eight 

GADHADÃ I 
- 208 - 
influences  are  unpleasant,  he  should  abandon  them  and  seek  only 
pleasant influences. 
 
78.9
 “Moreover, just as pleasant and unpleasant desh exist  outside  the 
body, a person’s body can also be a pleasant or unpleasant desh.    If 
the desh (the  body)  is  pleasant  when  the jeev resides  within  it,  then 
kalyãn-kãri qualities  such  as  nobility,  contentment,  compassion,  and 
dharma, develop.  However, if the desh (the body) is unpleasant when 
the jeev resides  within  it,  then  flaws  such  as kãm, krodh, lobh, moh, 
mad, and matsar develop instead. 
 
78.10
 “Also,  pleasant  and  unpleasant sang should   be   distinguished   as 
follows:    When  no  distance  remains  between  a  person  and  the sang 
he  keeps,  this  is  known  as  true sang.    Outwardly,  even  enemies 
embrace  each  other,  yet  their  hearts  are  hundreds  of  thousands  of 
miles apart.  Such outward sang cannot be called sang.  Only sang that 
is  kept  by  thought,  word,  and  deed,  can  be  called sang.    A  person 
should  keep  such sang – by  thought,  word,  and  deed – only  with 
Bhagvãn or  His bhaktas,  as  it  leads  to  the kalyãn of a person’s jeev.  
However, a person should never keep the sang of a sinner.” 
 
78.11
 Then, at midday, Shreeji Mahãrãj called all the young, student sãdhus 
and requested, “All of you student sãdhus, please ask me questions.” 
 
78.12
 Motã Shivãnand Swãmi then asked, “How can a person who has firm 
nishchay in Bhagvãn, be recognised?” 
 
78.13
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A person with firm nishchay in Bhagvãn 
regards  all  actions  performed  by Bhagvãn as kalyãn-kãri,  whether 
they are good or bad.  In fact, however many countless kinds of kriyã 
a  faithful bhakta witnesses,  whether Bhagvãn wins  or  loses  or  runs 
away,  or  whether  He  shows  pleasure  or  grief,  he  says, ‘All kriyãs of 
Bhagvãn are for the sake of kalyãn’.  If  a bhakta speaks  only  in  this 
way whenever he speaks, then he should be known to have absolute 
nishchay in Bhagvãn.” 

GADHADÃ I 
- 209 - 
78.14
 Then, Nirmanãnand Swãmi asked, “How can a person prevent the 
development  of  a  fault-finding  attitude  towards Bhagvãn and  His 
sãdhus?” 
 
78.15
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  answered, “If a  person possesses  the  previously 
mentioned firm nishchay in Bhagvãn, then he never develops a fault-
finding  attitude  towards Bhagvãn.    Furthermore,  when  he  thinks  of 
the  greatness  of  the dãs of  such  a  great Bhagvãn,  he  never  perceives 
faults in the bhaktas of Bhagvãn either.” 
 
78.16
 Then, Nirmanãnand Swãmi and Nãnã Pragnãnand Swãmi both asked, 
“How can a person see the murti of Bhagvãn in  all  the  three  mental 
states of jãgrat, svapna, and sushupti?” 
 
78.17
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “If  the  pure sanskãrs from  a  person’s 
previous  lives  are  powerful,  then  he  can  constantly  see  the murti of 
Bhagvãn in   all   three   states.      If   a   person,   who   continuously 
experiences  fear,  lust,  or  love  for  something,  can  see  objects  other 
than Bhagvãn constantly  in  all  three  states,  then  what  is  surprising 
about being able to see Bhagvãn constantly as well?  He can definitely 
be seen.” 
 
78.18
 Nãnã Shivãnand Swãmi then asked, “How can a person with a stable 
foundation in satsang be recognised?  That is the first question.  The 
second question is: How can the enemies, like mãn, kãm, krodh, lobh, 
mad, matsar, and irshyã, be destroyed?” 
 
78.19
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  explained,  “A  person  who  is  absolutely  loyal  to 
satsang cannot at all tolerate someone speaking unkindly of satsang.  
For  example,  even  though  a  person  may  have  had  a  disagreement 
with  a  member  of  his  family,  he  would  be  unable  to  tolerate  anyone 
speaking unkindly of them.  Therefore, just as a person is loyal to his 
relatives, if a person is similarly loyal to satsang, then his foundation 
in satsang is stable. 

GADHADÃ I 
- 210 - 
78.20
 “The answer to the second question is as follows:  If a person has 
such  loyalty  for satsang,  how  can  he  possibly  hold mãn or irshyã 
towards sant or satsangis?  Therefore, all the inner enemies, like mãn, 
mad, matsar,  and irshyã,  of  a  person  who  is  loyal  to satsang are 
destroyed.    However,  if  a  person  does  not  have  this  loyalty  for 
satsangis, and regards satsangis and kusangis as equal, then however 
highly he may be regarded in satsang, he is sure to become a vimukh.” 
 
78.21
 Then, Nãnã Ãtmãnand Swãmi asked, “Bhagvãn and  His sant may 
boldly  tell  someone  whatever  needs  to  be  said,  with  the  belief, 
‘Whether he is praised or lectured, he will not fall from satsang in any 
way’.  How  can  a  person  earn  this  trust  of Bhagvãn and His sant?  
That is one question.  The second question is:  How can a person win 
the love of all the sãdhus, just as he has won the love of the sãdhu he 
is presently staying with?” 
 
78.22
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “As in the answer to Shivãnand Swãmi’s 
question,  if  a  person  is  extremely  loyal  to satsang, Bhagvãn and  His 
sant do  not  hesitate  in  lecturing  him.    They  never  lack  faith  in  him, 
and  they  never  feel, ‘If he is lectured, he will leave satsang’.    Instead, 
they have firm faith and believe, ‘His satsang is firm, and so there is no 
danger in lecturing him’. 
 
78.23
 “The answer to the second question is:  He may leave the person he 
was previously staying with because he was unable to get along with 
him, and subsequently go and stay with another person.  Despite this, 
he  is  unable  to  tolerate  others  speaking  unkindly  of  the  person  he 
originally  stayed  with.    Therefore,  all  the sãdhus  feel, ‘This person is 
not  ungrateful.    He  is  a  very  good  sãdhu  because  he  has  not  forgotten 
that he is thankful to the person from whom he has learnt even a little’.  
Realising this, all the sãdhus like him.  On the other hand, if he speaks 
unkindly  of  the  person  he  originally  stayed  with,  all  the sãdhus  feel, 
‘This person is ungrateful.  In the future, if he does not get along with 
any of us, he will surely speak unkindly of us too’.  As  a  result,  no  one 
likes him.” 

GADHADÃ I 
- 211 - 
78.24
 Then, Daharãnand Swãmi asked, “Bhagvãn is  greater  than Akshar, 
mind and speech, and He is invisible to all.  Then, why can everyone 
see Him as pratyaksha?” 
 
78.25
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Bhagvãn – who is beyond Akshar, mind and 
speech,  and  who  is  invisible – Himself,  out  of  compassion,  decides, 
‘May all the enlightened and unenlightened people in Mrutyu-Lok  see 
me’.  Having decided this, Bhagvãn, who will always prevail, becomes 
visible to all people in Mrutyu-Lok out of compassion.” 
 
78.26
 Tyãgãnand Swãmi then asked, “How is Bhagvãn pleased?” 
 
78.27
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “A person who wants to please Bhagvãn 
should  not  wish  for  bodily  comforts.    He  should  not  even  crave  for 
the darshan of Bhagvãn.  To do exactly as Bhagvãn commands, is the 
only way to please Bhagvãn.” 
 
78.28
 Then, Lakshmanãnand Swãmi asked, “With what understanding is a 
person  able  to  feel  the  wonder  of  having  attained  the  profound 
association  of Bhagvãn and  His sãdhus?    Also,  how  can  he  feel  joyful 
all day and night?” 
 
78.29
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A bhakta realises, ‘This Bhagvãn and these 
sãdhus all reside in Vaikunth, Golok, and Brahmpur.  In fact, all of those 
dhãms   are   present   wherever   Bhagvãn   and   these   sãdhus   reside.  
Therefore,  I  am  extremely  fortunate  in  that  I  am  able  to  stay  in  the 
presence  of  these  sãdhus’.  If   he   understands   this,   then   he   will 
experience happiness all day and night, and will sway in an ocean of 
bliss throughout the day.” 
 
78.30
 Paramãtmãnand Swãmi then asked, “How can a person acquire the 
thirty  characteristics  of  a sãdhu described  in  the  eleventh skandh of 
the Shreemad Bhãgvat?” 
 
78.31
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A person who regards a sant, who possesses 
the thirty characteristics, as a guru and as a dev, and associates with 

GADHADÃ I 
- 212 - 
him by thought, word, and deed, acquires those thirty characteristics.  
In fact, all the shãstras state, ‘When a person serves a sant, he becomes 
like the sant’.” 
 
78.32
 Then, Shãntãnand Swãmi asked, “There is one bhakta who constantly 
maintains  his vrutti on  the svarup of Bhagvãn.    There  is  another 
bhakta who  engages  in bhajan and smaran,  and  also  listens  to  and 
engages in kathã and kirtans of Bhagvãn.  Which bhakta of Bhagvãn is 
the better of the two?” 
 
78.33
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  explained,  “A  person  who  experiences nirvikalp 
samãdhi and  is  not  conscious  of  his  body,  is  the  better  of  the  two, 
even  if  he  does  not  engage  in kathã and kirtans of Bhagvãn.    Also, 
there may be someone who is conscious of his body and gets up from 
worship  of  his  own  accord  to  eat,  drink,  and  perform  all  bodily 
activities,  and  still  does  not  listen  to  or  engage  in  the kathã and 
kirtans of Bhagvãn.    In  comparison  to  him,  a  person  who  does  listen 
to kathãs and kirtans is better.” 
 
78.34
 Ãdhãrãnand Swãmi then asked, “How should we behave so that 
Bhagvãn and His sant become pleased?” 
 
78.35
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If we strictly follow the panch-vartmãn, and 
do  not  allow  any  sort  of  failure  in  following  them, Bhagvãn and  His 
sant will be pleased.  There is not even the slightest doubt about this.” 
 
78.36
 Then,  Vedãntãnand  Swãmi  asked,  “If  a  person  has  previously 
behaved improperly, what can a person do to please Bhagvãn and His 
sant?” 
 
78.37
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “Bhagvãn and His sant become displeased 
upon  seeing  impure svabhãvs within  a  person.    When  we  develop  a 
hate towards those svabhãvs, a sant also realises this.  This is because 
whenever  a  person  has  hatred  towards  someone,  the  whole  world 

GADHADÃ I 
- 213 - 
knows.    As  a  result  of  this,  a sant,  who  himself  is  also  an  enemy  of 
those svabhãvs,  sides  with  us  and  imparts  compassion  upon  us, 
showing  us  the  way  to  conquer  those svabhãvs by  whichever  means 
possible.   
 
78.38
 “Therefore, after developing  a  bitter  hatred  towards  root svabhãvs 
that has led to a person’s disgrace, he should adopt a method that 
would  totally  remove  it.    When  we  behave in  this  way, Bhagvãn and 
His sant shower  total  compassion  upon  us.    Whenever Bhagvãn and 
His sant shower  their  compassion,  a  person  continues  to  experience 
extreme bliss within his heart.  Also, a person’s ability to walk on the 
path  of kalyãn increases,  and  the  strength  of  his  enemies,  such  as 
kãm, krodh and lobh,  decreases.    Therefore, Bhagvãn does  help  a 
person  who  keeps  intense  hatred  towards  that  bitter  enemy  which 
causes distress within his heart, which is why it is necessary to have 
hatred  for  the  enemies,  like kãm and krodh.    It  is  therefore  very 
beneficial to develop hatred towards his enemies.” 
 
78.39
 Then, Bhagvadãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, just as a person fears 
Bhagvãn when  he  is  near  Him,  what  understanding  should  a  person 
have so that he fears Bhagvãn just as much when he is far from Him?” 
 
78.40
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “Just as a person maintains the respect of 
Bhagvãn when He is near, the same respect remains when He is far if 
he thoroughly understands the greatness of Bhagvãn.  The greatness 
should  be  understood  as  follows:   ‘Purushottam Bhagvãn – who  is 
greater  than  Akshar;  by  whose  wish,  countless  millions  of  brahmãnds 
are created, and then supported by His powers;  who is vyatirek, yet is 
present  within  everything  as  anvay,  and  while  being  anvay,  is  also 
vyatirek  from  everything;  who  dwells  within  each  and  every  atom  in 
His antaryãmi  svarup  just  as  He  is  in  His  pratyaksha  svarup;  without 
whose   wish,   not   even   a   blade   of   grass   is   able   to   move;   who   is 
responsible  for  creating,  sustaining,  and  destroying  countless  millions 
of   brahmãnds;   who   administers   pain   and   pleasure   to   the   beings 

GADHADÃ I 
- 214 - 
residing in these brahmãnds; who is the sole doer of all that happens – 
incarnates on this earth for the kalyãn of the jeevs.   
 
78.41
 “‘However, when that very Bhagvãn mounts a horse, it appears that the 
horse is carrying Him.  But in reality, it is Bhagvãn who is the upholder 
of  the  horse.    Furthermore,  when  Bhagvãn  sits  on  the  earth,  it  seems 
that the earth is supporting Bhagvãn, but in reality, it is Bhagvãn who 
supports  the  entire  earth  along  with  its  sthãvar  and  jangam  forms  of 
life. 
 
78.42
 “‘At night, the light of the moon, an oil lamp, or a torch allows a person 
to  have  the  darshan  of  Bhagvãn.    During  the  day,  the  light  of  the  sun 
allows a person to have the darshan of Bhagvãn.  In reality, however, it 
is that Bhagvãn who provides light to the sun, the moon, and the flames 
of  fire.    These  are  the  magnificent  powers  of  Bhagvãn.    Despite  this, 
Bhagvãn  has  become  like  a  human  for  the  sake  of  the  kalyãn  of  the 
jeevs, and He is giving darshan to me’.  If  a  person  understands  the 
greatness of Bhagvãn in this way, then he can keep the same respect 
for Bhagvãn when he is far from Him as when he is near Him.” 
 
78.43
 Bhagvadãnand  Swãmi  then  asked  another  question:  “Nothing 
happens  without Bhagvãn’s will.    Everything  that  happens  is  all  the 
work of Bhagvãn alone.  So, when Bhagvãn or His bhaktas encounter 
difficulties,  why  does  He not  ease  their  distress?    Why  does  He  wish 
to increase their distress?” 
 
78.44
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “When Bhagvãn assumes a human svarup, 
it is normal for Him to behave in absolutely the same way as humans 
do, and not reveal His alokik powers.  This is how all the charitras of 
Bhagvãn are described in the shãstras.  Therefore, a person may only 
have  doubts  when Bhagvãn exhibits  new charitras.    But,  as  long  as 
the charitras of Bhagvãn are  like  those  performed  by  the  previous 
avatãrs, there should be no doubts in a person’s mind.” 
 

GADHADÃ I 
- 215 - 
78.45
 Then, Nirmalãnand Swãmi asked, “What understanding is required to 
thoroughly realise the greatness of a sant of Bhagvãn?” 
 
78.46
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “When a person thinks about the greatness 
of Matsya, Kurma, Varãh, Vãman, Parshurãm, Rãm, Krishna,  and  the 
countless avatãrs of Bhagvãn,   and   thinks, ‘Bhagvãn  has  freed 
countless  jeevs  through  Rãm,  Krishna,  and  other  avatars,  and  I am 
extremely fortunate that I have attained the profound association of a 
sant  of  that  very  Bhagvãn’, he   begins   to   thoroughly   realise   the 
greatness of the sant day by day.” 
78.47
 Then, Nãrãyanãnand Swãmi asked, “How is the jeev anvay with  the 
three bodies of sthul, sukshma, and kãran, and how is it vyatirek from 
them?” 
 
78.48
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “When the body encounters pleasures and 
pain, and the jeev takes on that pleasure and pain upon itself, the jeev 
is anvay with  the  three  bodies.    When  it  believes  itself  to  be  distinct 
from  the  pleasures  and  pain  of  the  three  bodies,  then  the jeev is 
vyatirek from them.” 
 
78.49
 Shunyãtitãnand Swãmi then asked, “When a person initially practices 
satsang,  he  has  deep  love  for sant and satsangis.    But,  why  does  this 
love later decline?” 
 
78.50
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “Initially, he holds very high respect for a 
sant.  Later, when he perceives a minor avgun in the sant, he regards 
it  as  a  minor avgun because  of  his  own  malicious  mind.    As  a  result, 
his  vicious  nature  flourishes,  and  his  respect  for  the sant declines.  
Then, if he thoughtfully eradicates this vicious nature, he becomes as 
pure  as  he  was  before.    However,  if  he  does  not  do  so,  he  will 
ultimately become a vimukh.” 
 
78.51
 Prasãdãnand  Swãmi  then  asked, “What is the cause of the jeev’s 
moksh?” 

GADHADÃ I 
- 216 - 
78.52
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “To do exactly as a sant says  without 
having any doubts, is the only cause of the jeev’s moksh.” 
 
78.53
 Then, Trigunãtitãnand Swãmi asked, “What methods should a person 
adopt when faced with unpleasant desh, kãl, kriyã, and sang?” 
 
78.54
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “The only way to overcome unpleasant 
desh, kãl, kriyã,  and sang,  is  to  escape  from  them  by  any  means 
possible.” 
78.55
 Nãnã Nirvikãrãnand Swãmi then asked, “Despite having nishchay in 
Bhagvãn, why is a person’s vãsnã not eradicated?” 
 
78.56
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A person’s vãsnã is  not  eradicated  because 
he has not fully realised the greatness of Bhagvãn.” 
 
78.57
 Then, Motã Yogãnand Swãmi asked, “Despite having perfect nishchay 
in Bhagvãn, why does a person still not develop love for Bhagvãn and 
the kathãs of Bhagvãn?” 
 
78.58
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “It is because he has not yet realised the 
greatness  of Bhagvãn as  it  is.    If  a  person  thoroughly  realises  the 
greatness of Bhagvãn, then he does not develop love for anything else 
besides Bhagvãn,  even  if  he  tries.    In  addition,  he  develops  constant 
love   only   for Bhagvãn,   His sant,   and   the kathãs and kirtans of 
Bhagvãn.” 
 
78.59
 Then,  Pratoshãnand  Swãmi  asked,  “How  can  a  person’s bhakti 
towards Bhagvãn remain constant?” 
 
78.60
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If a person thoroughly understands the 
greatness  of pratyaksha Shree  Krishna Purushottam – who  is  the 
cause  of  the  four avatãrs  of  Aniruddha, Pradyumna, Sankarshan,  and 
Vãsudev,  and  who  is  the  cause  of  the  twenty-four avatãrs – then  he 

GADHADÃ I 
- 217 - 
remains  steady  in  the  nine  types  of bhakti towards Bhagvãn,  like 
smaran and kirtan.” 
 
78.61
 After  answering  the  questions  of  all  the munis in  this  way,  Shreeji 
Mahãrãj asked them all, “Kãm, krodh, and lobh are the three gateways 
to Narak.  All of you please reveal if you have thoroughly conquered 
any of these.” 
 
78.62
 The munis then  spoke  about  the  ones  they  had  conquered.    Hearing 
this  from  the munis,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  became  extremely  pleased.  
After  happily  imprinting  His  holy  feet  on  the  chests  of  Ãtmãnand 
Swãmi,   Yogãnand   Swãmi,   Bhagvadãnand   Swãmi,   and   Shivãnand 
Swãmi, He added, “Just as Mahãnubhavãnand Swãmi and the others, 
are  senior munis,  these  four munis should  also  be  considered  senior 
along with them.  Therefore, do not allow anyone to insult them.” 
 
78.63
 Having advised Muktãnand Swãmi and the other senior sãdhus in this 
way, Shreeji Mahãrãj bid “Jay Sachidãnand” to everyone and returned 
to His residence for His meal.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 78 || 78 || 
 
 
|| End of Shree Gadhadã Pratham Prakaran || 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 218 - 
|| SHREE SWÃMINÃRAYAN VIJAYTETRÃM || 
 
 
VACHANÃMRUT 
Shree Sãrangpur Prakaran 
 
Sãrangpur – 1 
Conquering The Mind 
 
1.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Shrãvan  vad 5  [28
th
 August,  1820], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   the   veranda 
outside   the   north-facing  rooms  of  Jeevã  Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Sãrangpur.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of 
munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before Him. 
 
1.2
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked a question: “The shlok ‘jitam jagat ken 
mano hee yen’ explains  that  a  person  who  has  conquered  the  mind 
has  conquered  the  whole  world.    But,  how can  a  person  know 
whether the mind has been conquered?” 
 
1.3
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “When  the indriyas withdraw   from   the 
panch-vishays (shabda,  sparsh,  rup,  ras, and gandh)  and  no  desire  to 
indulge  in  those vishays remains,  then  all  the indriyas are  said  to  be 
conquered.  Also, when the indriyas do not come into contact with the 
vishays,  the  mind  also  does  not  come  into  contact  with  the indriyas, 
and its vrutti remains within the heart.  In this way, a person who has 
rejected  the panch-vishays with  absolute  determination  should  be 
known  as  having  conquered  his  mind.    But,  if  a  person  does  have 
some  love  for  the vishays,  then  even  if  he  has conquered  his mind, it 
should not be known as having been conquered.” 
 
1.4
 Again, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Can  the vishays be  defeated  by 
vairãgya, or are they defeated by love for Bhagvãn?” 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 219 - 
1.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “One way to defeat the vishays is ãtmã-
nishthã, and the other is the realisation of Bhagvãn coupled with the 
knowledge  of  His  greatness.    Specifically, ãtmã-nishthã should  be  of 
the  following  type:   ‘I am chaitanya, while the body is jad; I am pure, 
whereas  the  body  is  impure;  I  am  imperishable,  while  the  body  is 
perishable;  I  am  the  embodiment  of  bliss,  whereas  the  body  is  the 
embodiment of misery’.  In this way, when a person realises the ãtmã 
to  be  totally  distinct  from  the  body  in  every  way,  he  will  never 
consider himself to be the body nor will he have love for the vishays.  
That  is  how  the vishays are  restrained  through  knowledge  of  the 
ãtmã. 
 
1.6
 “Also, a person should think of the greatness of Bhagvãn in  the 
following  way:   ‘I am the ãtmã, while pratyaksha Bhagvãn, whom I 
have  attained,  is  Paramãtmã.    I  have  attained  Shree  Purushottam 
Bhagvãn  in  person,  the  very  Purushottam  Bhagvãn  who  is the  lord  of 
Golok,  Vaikunth,  Shvet-Dvip,  and  Brahmpur,  as  well  as  the  master  of 
Brahmã and  the  other  devs,  who  themselves  are  the  lords  of  countless 
millions of brahmãnds.  That Paramãtmã forever resides in my ãtmã.  I 
would discard all of my pleasures for the vishays of countless millions of 
brahmãnds, just for one second of darshan of that Bhagvãn.  Moreover, 
if  a  person  were  to  gather  together  all  the  pleasures  of  the  vishays  of 
countless millions of brahmãnds, even then it would not equal even one 
millionth  of  a  fraction  of  the  bliss  which  is  present  in  just  one  pore  of 
Bhagvãn.    In  fact,  in  the  Moksh-Dharma,  it  is  said  that  the  loks  of  the 
other devs are like Narak, compared to the Akshardhãm of Bhagvãn.  It 
is  that  very  Bhagvãn  whom  I  have  attained  in His  pratyaksha  svarup.  
So  how  can  I  possibly  discard  Him  and  wish  for  the  pleasures  of  the 
vishays, which are like the pits of Narak?  The pleasures of the vishays 
are nothing but the embodiment of misery’.  So,  the vishays can  be 
restrained by realising Bhagvãn’s greatness in this way. 
 
1.7
 “The vairãgya generated  by  knowledge  of ãtmã and Paramãtmã is 
such  that  it  eradicates  desires  of  the  pleasures  of  all vishays.    A 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 220 - 
person  who  has  rejected  the  pleasures  of  the vishays by  developing 
an  understanding  in this  way,  never  again  develops  love  for  the 
vishays.  Only such a person’s mind can be said to be conquered. 
 
1.8
 “Without this understanding, it may appear that a person has love, 
but  when  he  encounters  an  appealing vishay,  he  abandons Bhagvãn 
and  develops  love  for  that  object.    Or,  if  he develops  love for his  son 
or  wife,  or  he  suffers  an  illness,  or  the  pleasures  of  the vishays 
disappear,  then  his  love  for Bhagvãn decreases,  and  he  becomes 
confused.  Just as a dog’s puppy appears cute when it is young, the 
bhakti of such a person initially appears to be good, but ultimately it 
does not remain appealing.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur || 1 || 79 || 
 
 
Sãrangpur – 2 
Developing Love For Bhagvãn 
 
2.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Shrãvan  vad 6  [29
th
 August,  1820], 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  facing  north,  on  a  decorated  bedstead 
which  had  been  placed  on  the  veranda  outside  the  north-facing 
rooms of Jeevã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Sãrangpur.    He  was  wearing  a 
white khes and  had  tied  a  white pãgh around  His head.    He  had  also 
covered Himself with a white pachhedi.  A sabhã of munis, as well as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
2.2
 Then,  addressing  the munis, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Please begin a 
question-answer discussion amongst yourselves.” 
 
2.3
 Svayamprakãshãnand  Swãmi  then  asked,  “How  can  a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn develop intense love for the murti of Bhagvãn?” 
 
2.4
 The munis then    attempted    to    answer    the    question    amongst 
themselves, but were unable to give a precise answer. 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 221 - 
2.5
 So,  Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Love can develop due to beauty, due to 
lust,  due  to  greed,  due  to  some  selfish  motives,  or  due  to  the  other 
person’s qualities.  Of these, love which stems from beauty lasts only 
until  a  person  sees  the  disfigurement  caused  by  leprosy in  the other 
person’s body, or until the person develops leukoderma.  After that, 
the  love  which  once  existed  would  dissolve.    In  the  same  way,  love 
stemming from greed, lust, and selfishness also eventually dissolves.  
However,   love   developed   due   to   the  other  person’s  qualities, 
ultimately survives.” 
 
2.6
 Then, Somlã Khãchar asked Shreeji Mahãrãj, “Which qualities are 
these?  Are they external ones, or internal ones?” 
 
2.7
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “How is it possible to develop love due to 
external qualities?  To be more precise, it is love stemming from the 
qualities of the person’s speech, thoughts, and deeds, which does not 
dissolve.    Now,  are  you  asking  only  about  a bhakta developing  love 
for Bhagvãn?  Or, are you also asking about Bhagvãn developing love 
for the bhakta?” 
 
2.8
 Svayamprakãshãnand Swãmi clarified, “We are asking about both.” 
 
2.9
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then began to explain by saying, “A person should 
not  hurt  any  living  being  with  his  speech.    Also,  during  a  question-
answer discussion where principles are being debated with Bhagvãn 
and a senior sãdhu, those who are junior should give in to those who 
are  senior.    Also,  in  a sabhã,  he  should  not  ask  questions  that  may 
embarrass  a sãdhu who  is  senior  to  himself.    Instead,  he  should 
purposely   accept   defeat   before Bhagvãn and   a   senior sãdhu, 
regardless  of  whether  it  seems  appropriate  or  inappropriate.    Of 
these, he would not doubt an appropriate ãgnã.  But, even if it seems 
inappropriate and leads to doubts, he should not refuse to abide by it, 
at  least  at  that  time.    He  should  certainly  agree  and  say, ‘Mahãrãj, I 
will do just as you say’.  If  that ãgnã is  such  that  he  cannot  accept  it, 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 222 - 
and  if  it  is  the  wish  of Bhagvãn and  a  senior sãdhu to hear  his  plea, 
then  he  should  fold  his  hands  before  them  and  say  with bhakti, 
‘Mahãrãj,  the ãgnã which you gave me is fine, but I have certain doubts 
about it’.  In this way, he should speak modestly.  However, if it is not 
really  the  wish  of Bhagvãn to hear  his  plea,  then  he  should  say  to  a 
senior sãdhu or a bhakta who is close to Him, ‘Although Bhagvãn has 
given such an ãgnã, I simply cannot accept it’.  Then, the senior sãdhu 
would  find  a  compromise  regarding  that ãgnã.    However,  regardless 
of  whether the ãgnã seems  appropriate  or  inappropriate,  he  should 
not  immediately  refuse  to  abide  by  it.    He  should  use  politeness  to 
delay  the  following  of  the ãgnã given  by  those  who  are  senior,  but 
when  initially  told,  he  should  not  immediately  refuse.    This  is  how  a 
person should  behave  regarding  the  qualities of speech.    As  a result, 
Bhagvãn and  the  senior sãdhu develop  love  for  that bhakta,  and  the 
bhakta also develops strong love towards Bhagvãn. 
 
2.10
 “Next, how should a person behave physically?  Well, if his body 
seems  to  be  hyperactive,  he  should  weaken  it  by  engaging  in bhajan 
or  by  keeping  the chãndrãyan vrat.    Then,  on  noticing  this,  it  is  well 
and  good  if Bhagvãn or  a  senior sãdhu takes  care  of  his  body.  
However,  he  should  knowingly  take  care  of  his  own body.    Also,  he 
should physically serve Bhagvãn and His bhaktas.  When Bhagvãn or 
a  great sãdhu notices  a  person  behaving  in  this  way  physically,  they 
develop love for him, and that bhakta also develops love for Bhagvãn. 
 
2.11
 “Now, I shall describe the way  in  which  a  person  should  behave 
regarding  the  qualities  of  the  mind.    When  a bhakta does darshan of 
Bhagvãn,  he  should  do  so  with  a  focused  mind  and  concentrated 
vision.  Instead, when a person, or a dog, or some other animals, or a 
bird,  disturbs  him  while  he  is  performing darshan of Bhagvãn,  then 
his vrutti is broken from Bhagvãn’s darshan.  He begins to glance here 
and   there,   up   and   down,   and   also  see   them  at   the   same   time.  
Bhagvãn and  the  senior sãdhus are  not  at  all  pleased  upon  seeing  a 
person with such wandering vision. 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 223 - 
2.12
 “When such a bhakta does perform darshan, how does he do it?  Well, 
he  does it  just  as  any  ordinary  person  does.    A  person  who  has such 
an ordinary vision, should be known to be like a squirrel that squeaks 
and raises its tail at the same time.  He performs darshan of Bhagvãn 
and  notices  other  objects  at  the  same  time.    When  he  begins  to 
perform darshan in  such  an  ordinary  way,  he  does  not  remain  as 
devout as he previously was, and he declines day by day.  Therefore, 
while performing darshan of Bhagvãn a person should not look from 
side to side.  
 
2.13
 “The novelty and divinity experienced in a person’s heart at the time 
of  the  first darshan of Bhagvãn,  should  remain  exactly  the  same.  
Moreover,  he  should  look  at  the murti with  a  fixed  gaze,  and  then 
closing his eyes, he should internalise that murti, exactly as it, is in his 
heart.      For   example,   in   Dharmapur,   Kushalkunvar-Bãi   did   my 
darshan,  and  at  the  same  time,  closed  her  eyes  and  internalised  the 
murti in  her  heart.   Similarly,  a  person  should  perform darshan with 
an  attentive  mind  and  a  fixed  gaze,  but  he  should  not  perform 
darshan as  other  ordinary  people  do.    If,  along  with  the darshan of 
Bhagvãn,  he  also  looks  at  the  other  people,  or  cats,  or  dogs,  then 
when he has a dream, he sees not only Bhagvãn, but also those other 
objects.    That  is  why  a  person  should  perform darshan of Bhagvãn 
with a fixed gaze, and not with a wandering gaze. 
  
2.14
 “A person who performs darshan of Bhagvãn while keeping his sight 
under  control,  will  feel  that darshan to  be  continually  new.    In 
addition,  he  would  also  feel  any ãgnã that Bhagvãn may  have  given, 
to  be  new.    On  the  other  hand,  a  person  who  performs darshan 
superficially,  with  a  ordinary  vision,  would  feel Bhagvãn’s darshan 
and ãgnã to  be  ordinary.    Although  he  may  perform darshan every 
day,  for  such  a  person it  is  as if he has  not  performed darshan at  all.  
When  such  a  person  engages  in bhajan,  his  mind  would  not  remain 
stable.    Specifically,  when  he  attempts  to  concentrate  on Bhagvãn 
while his thinking is dispersed, other objects he may have seen would 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 224 - 
spontaneously come into his mind, along with Bhagvãn.  Therefore, a 
person  should  perform darshan only  of Bhagvãn.    The  mind  of  this 
person  remains  only  on Bhagvãn during bhajan and smaran.    His 
thinking    does    not    become    dispersed.        Instead,    it    becomes 
concentrated. 
 
2.15
 “Furthermore, I am able to determine when a person is performing 
darshan with  wandering  eyes.    A  great sãdhu whose  own  sight  and 
mind  are  kept  under  control  also  realises, ‘This person is performing 
darshan in a superficial way’.  A person who performs darshan in such 
an ordinary way, then begins to decline from satsang day by day. 
 
2.16
 “For example, a man who is  overcome  by kãm fixes  his  gaze  on  a 
beautiful woman with a focused mind.  At that time, if some animal or 
bird  were  to  pass  by  or  make  a  noise,  he  would  not  notice  it.    In  the 
same way, a person should attach himself to Bhagvãn with a similarly 
focused gaze, but he should not perform darshan in an ordinary way.” 
 
2.17
 Then, Nirvikãrãnand Swãmi raised a doubt, “Mahãrãj, we have to 
travel and speak to people all over the country.  As a result, our mind 
does not remain concentrated.” 
 
2.18
 In reply, Shreeji Mahãrãj questioned, “I have given an ãgnã for you to 
speak to people, but when have I ever given an ãgnã for you to ignore 
the darshan of this murti and perform darshan of other things?” 
 
2.19
 Having said this, Mahãrãj continued, “The same divinity that a person 
feels when he has darshan of the murti of Bhagvãn for the first time, 
can  be  retained if he  keeps  his mind  and  gaze  fixed  on Bhagvãn.   So, 
when he behaves in this way, in accordance with the qualities of the 
mind  mentioned  previously,  then  the  love  that Bhagvãn has  for  that 
bhakta remains  renewed.    Moreover,  the  love  which  that bhakta has 
towards Bhagvãn also constantly remains renewed. 
 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 225 - 
2.20
 “Also, both the eyes and ears should especially be kept under control.  
This is because worldly talks are prevalent everywhere.  If a person is 
attracted towards them through the vrutti of the ears, and he listens 
to  them,  then  all  of  those  worldly  words  would  be  recalled  when  he 
attempts to engage himself in bhajan.  Furthermore, anything seen by 
a  person  who  has  a  wandering  gaze,  is  also  recalled  during bhajan.  
That  is  why  both  of  these indriyas should  be  kept  strictly  under 
control.    However,  while  performing darshan of Bhagvãn’s murti,  if 
the vrutti of  person’s eyes and ears leaves the murti aside  and  is 
attracted towards other things, he should lecture them, by saying, ‘O 
fools!  What are you going to achieve by looking at svarups other than 
Bhagvãn,  and  by  listening  to  words  other  than  the  talks  of  Bhagvãn?  
As  of  yet,  you  have  not  attained  siddh-dashã  where  you  can  instantly 
receive  whatever  you  wish.    This is  because  you  are still  in the  process 
of  attaining  siddh-dashã.    As  a  result,  you  are  not  going  to  be  able  to 
obtain  those  vishays  that  you  desire.    So,  why  are  you  pointlessly 
grasping  for  them  and  leaving  Bhagvãn  aside?    Moreover,  even  if  you 
were to attain some insignificant vishay, then due to the sin incurred as 
a  result,  there  will  be  no  end  to  the  beatings  you  will  receive  in 
Yampuri’.  In this way, a person should tell off his eyes and ears. 
 
2.21
 “A person should also tell them, ‘When you become stabilised in the 
murti  of  Bhagvãn,  you  will  attain  siddh-dashã in  this  very  life.    As  a 
result,  you  will  be  able  to  naturally  hear  any  talks  occurring  in  any 
brahmãnd.    If  you  desire  to  have  a  charming  svarup  like  that  of 
Brahmã, Vishnu, or Shiv, then you will be able to attain such a svarup.  
Or,  if  you  wish,  you  will  become  a  bhakta  like  Lakshmi  or  Rãdhikã.  
Moreover, while worshipping Bhagvãn, if you do not attain siddh-dashã 
in  this very  life,  you  will  attain  siddh-dashã  after  death  when  you 
become a mukta.  However, without attaining siddh-dashã, even if you 
constantly look at some beautiful object until you die, you will still not 
be  able  to  attain  that  beauty;  and  even  if  you  listen  to  worldly  talks 
until you die, you will still not attain anything.  Instead, your mind will 
become extremely polluted by it’.  In this way, a person should advise 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 226 - 
his eyes and ears, and keep them fixed only on the murti of Bhagvãn.  
A person, who behaves in this way, increasingly develops love for the 
murti of Bhagvãn day  by  day.    As  a  result, Bhagvãn’s love  and  the 
great sãdhu’s love for that bhakta, also increases day by day.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur || 2 || 80 || 
 
 
Sãrangpur – 3 
‘Shravan’, ‘Manan’, ‘Nididhyãs’, ‘Sãkshãtkãr’ 
Mãnsi Pujã 
 
3.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on  the  evening  of Shrãvan  vad 7  [30
th
 
August,  1820],  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead 
on  the  veranda  outside  the  rooms  of  Jeevã  Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Sãrangpur.    He  was  wearing  a  white khes and  had  tied  a  white pãgh 
around His head.  He had also covered Himself with a black-bordered 
khes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places, 
had gathered before Him. 
 
3.2
 Svayamprakãshãnand Swãmi then asked Shreeji Mahãrãj a question: 
“Mahãrãj, suppose there is a bhakta who physically performs pujã of 
pratyaksha  Bhagvãn with  various  types pujã items.    Also,  suppose 
there  is  another bhakta who  performs mãnsi pujã of Bhagvãn using 
various imaginary items.  Of the two, which bhakta is better?” 
 
3.3
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “If  a  person  lovingly  performs pujã of 
Bhagvãn,  with  hair-raising  sentiments  and  an  emotion-filled  voice, 
then  regardless  of  whether  he  performs  physical pujã or mãnsi pujã, 
both   are   superior.      On   the   other   hand,   if   he   performs pujã 
mechanically – without   feeling   love   or   excitement,   and   without 
showing   emotion   in   his   voice – then   regardless   of   whether   he 
performs  physical pujã of Bhagvãn or mãnsi pujã of Bhagvãn,  both 
are inferior.” 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 227 - 
3.4
 Then, Somlã Khãchar asked, “By what characteristics can a person 
recognise   a bhakta who   becomes   overwhelmed   with   love   while 
performing physical pujã or mãnsi pujã of Bhagvãn?” 
 
3.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Such a person has intense shraddhã in 
performing  the pujã of Bhagvãn and  serving  Him,  in  listening  to 
kathãs  and  talks  related  to Bhagvãn,  and  in  singing kirtans.    He  also 
understands  the  profound  greatness  of Bhagvãn.    With  each  passing 
day,  both  of  these  two  aspects  remain  renewed,  but  never  diminish.  
For example, Muktãnand Swãmi’s shraddhã and  understanding  of 
Bhagvãn’s greatness  are  exactly  the  same  today  and  just  as  new  as 
they were when I first saw him in Lojpur.  They have not diminished 
in  any  way  whatsoever.    In  the  same  way,  such  a bhakta should  be 
recognised by these two characteristics. 
 
3.6
 “All the Yãdavs who stayed with Shree Krishna Bhagvãn, did not have 
such shraddhã or understanding of Bhagvãn’s greatness.  They served 
Him  just  like  they  would  serve  other  kings.    Therefore,  they  did  not 
achieve  fame  and  are  not  even  regarded  as bhaktas.    On  the  other 
hand,  Uddhavji  served Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn with shraddhã and  an 
understanding of His greatness, and therefore he has been described 
as  a  great bhakta of Bhagvãn and  has  been  extremely  renowned  in 
the shãstras and in the world.” 
 
3.7
 Then,  Nirvikãrãnand  Swãmi  asked,  “Mahãrãj,  what  are shravan, 
manan, nididhyãs, and sãkshãtkãr?” 
 
3.8
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “To listen to a talk through the ears, is 
known  as shravan.    Then,  after  hearing  the  talk,  to  mentally  think 
over  the  talk,  and  to  discard  parts  of  the  talk  which  are  not  needed 
and  to  retain  the  parts  of  the  talk  which  are  useful,  is  known  as 
manan.    Then,  after  having  mentally  retained  the  talk  with nishchay, 
the practice of continuously recalling the talk day and night is known 
as nididhyãs.  Finally, when that talk is recalled exactly as it was, with 
absolute clarity and sincerity, it is known as sãkshãtkãr. 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 228 - 
3.9
 “If a person engages in shravan, manan,  and nididhyãs about  the 
svarup of  the ãtmã,  then  he  will  attain sãkshãtkãr of  the ãtmã.  
Furthermore, if a person engages in shravan, manan, and nididhyãs of 
Bhagvãn,  then  he  will attain sãkshãtkãr of Bhagvãn.   Sãkshãtkãr 
cannot  be  attained  by  doing shravan alone,  without  practicing  both 
manan and nididhyãs. 
 
3.10
 “If a person does not practice manan and nididhyãs following  the 
darshan of Bhagvãn’s murti,  then  even  if  he  performs darshan for 
thousands of years, he will not attain sãkshãtkãr of that murti.  This is 
because this kind of darshan is like having done only shravan.  On the 
other hand, if a person has had darshan of Bhagvãn’s entire body, and 
has then done manan and nididhyãs of all the parts of His body, then 
he  will  be  able  to  easily  recall  those  parts even  today.    Conversely,  a 
person who has performed only darshan of Bhagvãn’s body would be 
unable to recall it, even if he attempted to recall it. 
 
3.11
 “Also, there are  some bhaktas who  say, ‘We sit in meditation and try 
very hard to recall Mahãrãj’s murti, yet we cannot visualise even a 
single part.  Then, how can we possibly envision the whole murti?’  The 
reason for this is the same as above – they merely perform darshan of 
the murti,  without  doing manan and nididhyãs.    So,  how  can  it  be 
visualised?    After  all,  if  a  person  has  merely  seen  even  a  worldly 
object  with  his  eyes,  or  merely  listened  to  it  with  his  ears,  and  it  is 
not  later  mentally  recalled,  it  will  be  forgotten.    Then,  how  can  he 
expect  to  remember  the murti of Bhagvãn,  which  is divya and  not 
worldly, without doing manan and nididhyãs? 
 
3.12
 “Therefore, if a person continuously engages in manan and nididhyãs 
after  performing darshan of Bhagvãn and  listening  to  His  talks,  then 
he  will  attain sãkshãtkãr of  them.    Otherwise,  even  if  he  performs 
darshan and shravan for  the  rest  of  his  life,  he  will  still  not  attain 
sãkshãtkãr.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur || 3 || 81 || 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 229 - 
Sãrangpur – 4 
Ãtmã And Non-Ãtmã 
 
4.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Shrãvan  vad 8  [31
st
 August,  1820], 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was sitting  facing  north  on  a decorated  bedstead  on 
the  veranda  outside  the  rooms  of  Jeevã  Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Sãrangpur.  He was wearing a white khes, and had tied a white pãgh 
around  His  head.    He  had  covered  Himself  with  a  white pachhedi.    A 
sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had 
gathered before Him. 
 
4.2
 Svayamprakãshãnand Swãmi then asked a question:  “Mahãrãj, how 
should a person clearly understand the distinction between the ãtmã 
and non-ãtmã, which will never cause him to mistake ãtmã and non-
ãtmã to be one?” 
 
4.3
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “That  which  is  understood  clearly  is 
beneficial – whether it is understood by one verse, or by two verses, 
or  by  five  verses,  or  by  a  hundred  verses,  or  even  by  a  thousand 
verses.  So, once a person has developed such a clear understanding, 
no  misconception  remains  about  the ãtmã and  non-ãtmã being  one.  
Furthermore,   only   such   clear   understanding   leads   to   happiness, 
whereas   a   foolish   understanding   does   not   lead   to   happiness.  
Therefore,  a  person  should  clearly  understand, ‘I am the ãtmã, and 
not  a  single  one  of  my  characteristics  can  be  found  in  the  body.    Also, 
not one of the characteristics of the body – which is jad, full of misery, 
and  perishable – can be found in me, since I am chaitanya’.  After 
making   such   a   distinction   and   becoming   totally   free   of   worldly 
desires,  a  person  should  believe  himself  to  be chaitanya and  then 
think of Purushottam Bhagvãn.  Distinguishing between that which is 
jad and  that  which is chaitanya in  this  way should be  known  as  true 
wisdom. 
 
4.4
 “However, a person who believes himself to be the ãtmã for a while, 
but  then  believes  himself  to  be  the  body  for  a  while  and  fantasises 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 230 - 
about women,  should  be  known  as  a  fool.    He  will  not  experience 
happiness  in  his  heart.    For  example,  there  may  be  some  delicious 
food  which  is  comparable  to amrut ,  but  if  just  a  small  amount  of 
poison  were  to  be  mixed  with  it,  then  that  food  would  never  give  a 
person pleasure, but would in fact lead to misery.  In the same way, a 
person may think of that ãtmã all day, but if he believes himself to be 
the  body  and  fantasises  about  women,  even  for  just  a  moment,  then 
all of his thoughts are useless.  Therefore, a person should think only 
of the ãtmã, so he can become totally free of worldly desires. 
 
4.5
 “Now, someone may doubt: ‘What will become of me if I do not 
become  totally  free  of  worldly  desires  and  happen  to  die  in  that 
imperfect state?’  Well,  a bhakta of Bhagvãn should  never  think  like 
that.  Instead, he should realise, ‘If anything dies, it is this body.  But as 
I am that ãtmã, which does not age and is immortal, I will never die’.  
Having   developed   such   an   understanding,   he   should   maintain 
courage, keep a firm mind, and discard all desires other than those of 
Bhagvãn. 
 
4.6
 “Then, in the process of eradicating worldly desires in this way, if a 
few  desires  do  remain,  he  will  attain  the Naraks described  in  the 
Moksh-Dharma.    Specifically,  if  a bhakta of Bhagvãn retains  any 
desires for the world, then he attains the loks of Indra and other devs.  
After migrating to those loks, he experiences the pleasures of apsãrãs, 
heavenly  vehicles,  palaces  decorated  with  jewels,  and  other  luxuries 
– which  are  like Narak,  in  comparison  to  the dhãm of Bhagvãn.  
However, a bhakta of Bhagvãn does not go to Yampuri, like a vimukh, 
nor does he re-enter the cycle of births and deaths. 
 
4.7
 “Therefore,  even  if  a bhakta of Bhagvãn has  worldly   desires,   if 
nothing  else,  he  will  become  a dev.    Then,  having  become  a dev,  he 
will  become  a  human  again.    As  a  human,  after  offering bhakti to 
Bhagvãn and  becoming  free  of  worldly  desires,  he  will  ultimately 
attain the dhãm of Bhagvãn.  But, he will not have to suffer from the 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 231 - 
miseries  of Narak or  the  cycle  of  births  and  deaths,  like  the vimukh.  
Bearing   this   in   mind,   a bhakta of Bhagvãn should   not   become 
discouraged  on  seeing  the  force  of  worldly  desires.    Instead,  he 
should   joyfully   continue   to   worship Bhagvãn,   continue   in   his 
attempts  to eradicate  his  desires,  and  maintain  absolute  faith  in  the 
words of Bhagvãn and His sant.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur || 4 || 82 || 
 
 
Sãrangpur – 5 
Worldly Desires Are Defeated By Bhakti 
 
5.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Shrãvan  vad 9  [1
st
 September,  1820], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  north-facing  rooms  of  Jeevã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Sãrangpur.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from various places, 
had gathered before Him. 
 
5.2
 Then,  Muktãnand  Swãmi  asked  a  question:  “Which  method  of 
eradicating  worldly  desires  is  so  powerful  that  it  alone  incorporates 
all other methods?” 
 
5.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The worldly desires of a person  will  be 
eradicated,  if  he  has  the  following  four  characteristics  in  his  heart:  
shraddhã,  faith  in  the  words  of Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas,  love  for 
Bhagvãn, and the knowledge of the greatness of Bhagvãn’s svarup.  Of 
these, if the knowledge of Bhagvãn’s greatness is extremely powerful 
and  the  other  three – shraddhã,  faith,  and  love – are  weak,  they  will 
also  become  extremely  powerful.    On  the  other  hand,  although  a 
person may appear to have intense bhakti, if it is not coupled with the 
knowledge  of Bhagvãn’s greatness,  it  will  ultimately  be  destroyed.  
For example, a ten-year-old girl who has contracted tuberculosis will 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 232 - 
certainly  die  before  she  matures  into  a  young  woman.    Similarly,  a 
person whose bhakti lacks the knowledge of Bhagvãn’s greatness will 
find that his bhakti will be destroyed before it matures. 
 
5.4
 “Furthermore, if a person has bhakti for Bhagvãn in his heart coupled 
with  the  knowledge  of Bhagvãn’s greatness,  then  even  though  he 
does   not   possess   any   other kalyãn-kãri qualities,   they   will   still 
develop in his heart.  Conversely, if a person does not have bhakti in 
his  heart  coupled  with  the  knowledge  of Bhagvãn’s greatness,  then 
even  though  he  possesses kalyãn-kãri qualities,  such  as  tranquillity 
and self-restraint, they are as good as being absent because they will 
ultimately be destroyed. 
 
5.5
 “Therefore,  even  if  a  person  has  only bhakti coupled   with   the 
knowledge  of Bhagvãn’s greatness,  his  worldly  desires  will  still  be 
eradicated,  and  all  the kalyãn-kãri qualities  will  develop  and  reside 
within  his  heart.   Bhakti of Bhagvãn coupled  with  the  knowledge  of 
His greatness is the greatest and most reliable method to eradicate a 
person’s worldly desires.” 
 
5.6
 Then, Svayamprakãshãnand Swãmi asked, “What is the anvay nature 
of the jeev, and what is its vyatirek nature?  What is the anvay nature 
of ishvar,  and  what  is  its vyatirek nature?    How  should Purushottam 
Bhagvãn be known in His anvay form, and how should He be known 
in His vyatirek form?” 
 
5.7
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “When the jeev is said to experience births 
and deaths, that should be known as the jeev’s anvay form.  When the 
jeev is  said  to  be achhedhya, abhedhya,  and avinãshi,  that  should  be 
known as the jeev’s vyatirek form. 
 
5.8
 “When ishvar behaves as one with its three bodies of virãt, sutrãtmã, 
and avyãkrut,  that  should  be  known  as  the anvay form  of ishvar.  
When ishvar is described as sachidãnand, and as greater than its body 
(the brahmãnd), that should be known as the vyatirek form of ishvar. 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 233 - 
5.9
 “The anvay form  of Akshar is  the  inspirer  of Prakruti-Purush and  all 
the devs, such as Surya, and Chandra.  The form in which there is not 
even  a  trace  of  the  influence  of Prakruti-Purush,  and  in  which  only 
Purushottam Bhagvãn resides, should be known as the vyatirek form 
of Akshar. 
 
5.10
 “The anvay form of Purushottam is that which resides in the hearts of 
both  bound jeevs  and  released jeevs  as  their  witness.    However,  He 
remains  untouched  by  such  states  of  bondage  and  release.    In  the 
same way, He also resides in the hearts of ishvars and Akshar as their 
witness, but He remains unaffected by their influence.  The form that 
is  greater  than jeev, ishvar,  and Akshar should  be  known  as  the 
vyatirek form  of Purushottam.    These  are  the anvay-vyatirek natures 
of the various entities.” 
 
5.11
 Again, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Does the importance of Bhagvãn’s 
darshan,   the   importance   of   chanting   His   holy   name,   and   the 
importance  of  the  touch  of Bhagvãn,  apply  only  to  the bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn, or does it also apply to all beings?” 
 
5.12
 Shreeji   Mahãrãj  answered,  “The  modes  of darshan are   certainly 
different,  so  please  listen  as  I  explain  them  to  you.    When  a  person 
does darshan of Bhagvãn with  his  eyes  coupled  with  his  mind,  then 
that darshan could  not  be  forgotten,  even  if  he  tired  to  forget  it.    In 
the  same  way,  if  the  skin  is  coupled  with  the  mind  when  he  touches 
Bhagvãn, then that touch will also not be forgotten.  For example, the 
Shreemad   Bhãgvat   narrates   the   words   spoken   by   the gopis to 
Bhagvãn:   ‘O Bhagvãn!  Since the day we touched your feet, all  the 
pleasures of the world, apart from you, have seemed like poison to us’.  
Similarly,  when  all  the gnãn-indriyas are  coupled  with  the  mind  and 
are then engaged in darshan, listening, and touching, the experiences 
are never forgotten. 
 
5.13
 “To give another  example,  an  ignorant  person  who  indulges  in  the 
vishays when  the  five gnãn-indriyas are  coupled  with  his  mind,  can 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 234 - 
never  forget  them,  even  if  he  wants  to  forget  them.    Similarly,  only 
that darshan of Bhagvãn, and listening to the talks of Bhagvãn, which 
have been done with the mind engaged, should be known as darshan 
and listening. 
 
5.14
 “On the other hand, a person may do darshan, but it is as good as not 
having done darshan at all.  This is because at the time he was doing 
darshan,  his  mind  was wandering  elsewhere.    As  a  result,  he  will 
certainly forget that darshan within a day, or maybe within five days, 
or  maybe  within  fifty  days,  or  maybe  within  six  months,  or  maybe 
after one year, or after five years; eventually, it will not remain. 
 
5.15
 “Therefore,  only  a  person  who  engages  the  five gnãn-indriyas (eyes, 
ears,  nose,  tongue,  skin)  coupled  with  the  mind,  in  the darshan and 
touch  of Bhagvãn with  intense  love  and  the  understanding  of  His 
greatness,  attains  the  fruits  of  that darshan and  touch.   Others,  who 
have   the darshan and   touch   of Bhagvãn,   attain   only   the   seeds.  
However,  the  real  importance  applies  only  to  those  who  engage  in 
the darshan and touch, coupled with the mind.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur || 5 || 83 || 
 
 
Sãrangpur – 6 
Two States Within Each Of The Three Mental States 
The Four Types Of Speech 
 
6.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Shrãvan  vad 10  [2
nd
 September,  1820], 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on  the  veranda 
outside   the   north-facing  rooms  of  Jeevã  Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Sãrangpur.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of 
munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before Him. 
 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 235 - 
6.2
 Then, Nityãnand Swãmi asked, “How do the mental states remain 
within each of the other mental states?” 
 
6.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The ‘state’ is where the jeevãtmã dwells, 
when  it  indulges  in  the vishays.    There  are  three  types  of  mental 
states:  jãgrat, svapna, and sushupti. 
 
6.4
 “Of these, the jãgrat state  is  the  result  of  the  sustenance  state  of 
Virãt-Purush.  It is full of sattva-gun and is located in the region of the 
eyes.  In that jãgrat state, the jeevãtmã is known as vishva.  Moreover, 
with  the consciousness of  its sthul body,  via  the  ten indriyas and  the 
four antah-karans, the jeevãtmã appropriately and carefully indulges 
in  the  pleasures  of  the  external vishays according  to  its past karmas.  
This is known as the jãgrat state, in which sattva-gun is predominant. 
 
6.5
 “Within the jãgrat state,  if  the jeevãtmã indulges  in  the  pleasures  of 
the external vishays inappropriately due to some misconception, then 
that  is  known  as  the svapna state  within  the jãgrat state.    In  the 
jãgrat state,  if  the jeevãtmã indulges  in  the  pleasures  of  the  external 
vishays irresponsibly,  due  to  grief  or  fatigue,  then  that  is  known  as 
sushupti within the jãgrat state. 
 
6.6
 “The svapna state is  the  result of  the  creation  state  of Hiranyagarbh.  
It is full of rajo-gun and is located in the region of the throat.  In that 
svapna state, the jeevãtmã is known as taijas.  With the consciousness 
of  its sukshma body,  via  the indriyas and antah-karans,  the jeevãtmã 
indulges  in  pleasurable  and  miserable vishays,  which  are  temporary, 
according  to  its  past karmas.    This  is  known  as  the svapna state,  in 
which rajo-gun in predominant. 
 
6.7
 “Within the svapna state,  if  the jeevãtmã knowingly  indulges  in  the 
pleasures  of  the  temporary vishays carefully  and  with  awareness, 
exactly  as  it  does  during  the jãgrat state,  then  that  is  known  as  the 
jãgrat state within the svapna state.  However, if in that svapna state 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 236 - 
the jeevãtmã,    due    to    sluggishness,    does    not    recognise    those 
temporary vishays which  it  experiences,  then  that  is  known  as  the 
sushupti state within the svapna state. 
 
6.8
 “The sushupti state is the result of the destruction state of ishvar.  It is 
full  of tamo-gun and  is  located  in  the  region  of  the  heart.    When  the 
jeev is in that sushupti state, the vruttis of the indriyas and the antah-
karan,  the  desires  for  the  pleasures  of  the vishays,  and  its  sense  of 
knower-ship  and  doer-ship,  all  become  merged  in  the kãran body.  
When  the jeevãtmã,  which  has  the  consciousness  of  its kãran body, 
and is known as prãgna, remains fully absorbed in the bliss of sagun 
brahm in  the  form  of Pradhãn-Purush,  it  is  known  as  the sushupti 
state, in which tamo-gun is predominant. 
 
6.9
 “Within the sushupti state, if a sense of doer-ship develops due to the 
impressions of a person’s karmas,  then  that  is  known  as  the svapna 
state within  the sushupti state.    Then,  opposing  realisation  of  that 
sense of doer-ship – which disrupts the bliss of sushupti on account of 
the  agony  of  the  pain  experienced  during jãgrat and svapna – is 
known as the jãgrat state within the sushupti state. 
 
6.10
 “In this way, the other two states reside within each individual state.  
Also,  that  which  gives  knowledge  of  these  distinctions  between  the 
states  to  the jeevãtmã,  and  who  gives  the jeev the  rewards  of  its 
karmas accordingly within those states, is known as turyapad, as the 
antaryãmi, as the drashtã, as Brahm, and also as Parbrahm.” 
 
6.11
 Again, Nityãnand Swãmi asked, “How should a person understand 
the   four   types   of   speech – ‘parã’, ‘pashyanti’, ‘madhyamã’,   and 
‘vaikhari’?” 
 
6.12
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “That is a vast, as well as an extremely subtle 
subject,  but  in  the  eleventh skandh of  the  Shreemad  Bhãgvat, Shree 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 237 - 
Krishna Bhagvãn explains  it  to Uddhavji.    Please  listen  as  I  explain it 
in brief. 
 
6.13
 “At the time of the first creation, after entering the thousand-petalled 
lotus  which  lies  on  the  head  of Virãt-Purush, Purushottam Bhagvãn 
produced the ancient divine sound – like the sound of  Akshar-Brahm.  
Then, via the sushumnã path, that divine sound pervaded the navel of 
Virãt-Purush.    Then,  along with mahã-prãn,  it  rose  upwards,  and 
caused Virãt-Purush’s  lotus-navel – which   was   previously   facing 
downwards – to   face   upwards.      In   this   way,   the   divine   sound 
produced  in  the  navel  of Virãt-Purush is  known  as the ‘parã’ speech.  
For  the  purpose  of  creating  the  Veds, Bhagvãn Himself  has  inspired 
that ‘parã’ speech.    Therefore,  it  is  like  a  seed.    That ‘parã’ speech  is 
like a stream of light, and is the cause of the ‘ardhamãtrã’. 
 
6.14
 “From there, the ‘parã’ speech  reached  the hruday-ãkãsh of Virãt-
Purush, where it was known by the name of ‘pashyanti’.  From there it 
reached  the  region  of  the  throat  and  became  known  by  the  name  of 
‘madhyamã’.    From  there,  it  reached  the  mouth  of Virãt-Purush and 
received the name of ‘vaikhari’.  It then became the form of pranav by 
becoming the three sounds of ‘A’, ‘U’, and ‘M’.  It then became the 
fifty-two  syllables,  and  took  the  form  the  four  Veds.    In  this  way,  a 
person should understand the four types of speech in Virãt-Purush – 
‘parã’, ‘pashyanti’, ‘madhyamã’, and ‘vaikhari’. 
 
6.15
 “Now, I shall describe these four types of speech which also dwell 
within the body of the jeev, so please listen.  That same Purushottam 
Bhagvãn resides  in  the jeev as antaryãmi.    He  is  independent,  yet 
interwoven  with  the  three  mental  states  of  the jeev.    That  same 
Bhagvãn assumes  an avatãr on  this  earth  for  the kalyãn of  the jeevs.  
At  that  time,  those jeevs  describe  the svarup of  that Bhagvãn as  well 
as  His dhãms,  qualities,  and  divine  powers.    They  describe  His divya 
charitras,  make  a  distinction  between ãtmã and  non-ãtmã,  and  also 
individually   explain   the   differences   between jeev, ishvar, mãyã, 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 238 - 
Brahm,  and Parbrahm.    Such speech  is  known  as ‘parã’.    Speech  that 
gives a complete explanation of mãyik worldly entities and vishays is 
known  as ‘vaikhari’.    Speech  that  gives  an  incomplete  explanation, 
and creates confusion of mãyik worldly entities and vishays, is known 
as ‘madhyamã’.    Finally,  speech  which  blindly  describes  those mãyik 
worldly  entities and vishays as  being  the  same,  and  which  cannot  be 
understood, is known as ‘pashyãnti’. 
 
6.16
 “In this way, the details of the four types of speech can be known in 
the jãgrat state of the jeev.  The details of those four types of speech 
in the svapna and sushupti states can only be known by a person who 
has mastered samãdhi – it cannot be known by others.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur || 6 || 84 || 
 
 
Sãrangpur – 7 
Naimishãranya Kshetra 
 
7.1
 In   the Samvat year   1877,   on   the   night   of Shrãvan   vad 11   [3
rd
 
September,   1820],   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  north-facing  rooms  of  Jeevã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Sãrangpur.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from various places, 
had gathered before Him. 
 
7.2
 In  the sabhã,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  had  requested  the  first skandh of  the 
Shreemad   Bhãgvat   Purãn   to   be   read.      During   the   reading,   the 
following  statement  was encountered: ‘Wherever the jagged edges of 
the  manomay  chakra  are  worn  away, that  place  should  be  known  as 
Naimishãranya Kshetra’.  Hearing  this,  Muktãnand  Swãmi  inquired, 
“Mahãrãj, what exactly is the manomay chakra,  and  what  should  a 
person understand its jagged edges to be?” 
 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 239 - 
7.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “A person should understand the mind to 
be  the manomay chakra,  and  the  ten indriyas to  be  its  jagged  edges.  
Wherever  those  jagged  edges  of  the  mind  (the indriyas)  wear  away 
and  become  blunt,  that  place  should  be  known  as Naimishãranya 
Kshetra.  Religious deeds (jap, tap, vrat, dhyãn, and pujã) commenced 
in   that   place   flourish   rapidly,   day   by   day.      Furthermore,   that 
Naimishãranya Kshetra should  be  known  to  be  wherever Bhagvãn’s 
ekãntik sant resides. 
 
7.4
 “When the jagged edges of the manomay chakra are  worn  away,  no 
affection  remains  towards  any  of  the panch-vishays.    Then,  even  if  a 
person  sees  a  beautiful  woman,  or  extremely  attractive  clothes,  or 
jewellery,  a  strong  hatred  develops  towards  them  deep  within  his 
mind.  However, the vruttis of indriyas would never cling to them. 
 
7.5
 “For example, when an extremely sharp arrow pierces and lodges 
into  its  target,  it  cannot  be  removed.    However,  if  that  same  arrow, 
with its tip removed so that only its shaft remains, were to be shot at 
a  wall,  it  would  rebound  and  fall  to  the  ground.    It  would  not 
penetrate  the  wall  like  the  sharp-tipped  arrow.    Similarly,  when  the 
jagged  edges  of  the manomay chakra (the indriyas)  are  worn  away, 
then  no  matter  how  appealing  the vishays may  be,  the vruttis of  the 
indriyas would  not  be  drawn  towards  them.    Instead,  they  would 
rebound like the blunt arrow-shaft.  When a person is able to behave 
in  this  way,  the  jagged  edges  of  the manomay chakra can  be  said  to 
have been worn away. 
 
7.6
 “So,  a  person  should  seek kalyãn wherever   he   sees   such   a 
Naimishãranya Kshetra in the form of the association of a sant, and he 
should remain there with an absolutely firm mind.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur || 7 || 85 || 
 
 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 240 - 
Sãrangpur – 8 
The Characteristics Of Irshyã 
 
8.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Shrãvan  vad 12  [4
th
 September,  1820], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  north-facing  rooms  of  Jeevã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Sãrangpur.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from various places, 
had gathered before Him. 
 
8.2
 Chaitanyãnand  Swãmi  then  asked,  “Mahãrãj,  what  are  the 
characteristics of irshyã?” 
 
8.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Irshyã develops from the mãn that a person 
holds within his heart.  In fact, krodh, matsar, and asuyã also arise out 
of mãn.    But  the  characteristic  of irshyã is  that  a  person  cannot 
tolerate  someone  greater  than  himself  being  honoured.    A  person 
who has such a nature should be known to have irshyã with his heart.  
Moreover, a person who has extreme irshyã cannot tolerate anyone’s 
greatness.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur || 8 || 86 || 
 
 
Sãrangpur – 9 
The Prevalence Of The Dharma Of The Yugs 
 
9.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Shrãvan  vad 13  [5
th
 September,  1820], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   walked   from   Sãrangpur   and 
arrived  at  Kundal  to  please  His haribhaktas.    There,  He  was  sitting 
facing  north  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the 
west-facing rooms of Amrã Patgar’s home.  He had tied a white pãgh 
around His head.  He had covered Himself with a white pachhedi, and 
was wearing a white survãl and white angarkhu.  A sabhã of munis, as 
well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 241 - 
9.2
 Muktãnand Swãmi then asked, “Mahãrãj, why do the dharmas of  the 
yugs prevail in a person’s heart?” 
  
9.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The dharmas of the yugs prevail because of 
the three gun.  When pure sattva-gun is prevalent, Satya-Yug prevails 
in  the  heart.    When rajo-gun is  prevalent, Tretã-Yug prevails  in  the 
heart.  When rajo-gun and tamo-gun are prevalent together, Dvãpar-
Yug prevails in the heart.  Finally, when tamo-gun alone is prevalent, 
Kali-Yug prevails in the heart.  In this way, the prevalence of the yugs 
is due to the gun.” 
 
9.4
 Muktãnand Swãmi asked further, “What causes the activities of the 
gun?” 
 
9.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The cause of the activities of the gun are 
karmas.    Specifically,  the  type  of karmas  a  person  has  performed 
previously,  determines  the gun that  will  prevail.  Therefore,  if  a 
person,  in  whom rajo-gun and tamo-gun are  prevalent,  attempts  to 
perform dhyãn on Bhagvãn,  he  will  not  be  able  to  do  so.    In  such 
situations,  he  should  make  use  of  the  strength  of ãtmã-nishthã and 
Bhagvãn’s greatness.    He  should  realise, ‘I am the ãtmã.  Since I am 
gunãtit, there can be no mãyik influence within me’.  Furthermore, he 
should realise Bhagvãn’s greatness in the following way:  ‘Ajãmel was 
a  terrible  sinner  and  yet,  because  of  his  son,  he  uttered  the  name  of 
“Nãrãyan”.  As a result,  he  was  freed  from  all  his  sins  and  attained 
Akshardhãm.    I  have  attained  that  Bhagvãn  in  His  pratyaksha  svarup, 
and I chant His holy name day and night.  Therefore, I am fulfilled’.  
Thinking in such a way, he should always remain joyful. 
 
9.6
 “However,  a  person  in  whom rajo-gun and tamo-gun are  prevalent 
should not insist on performing dhyãn.  Instead, he should engage in 
bhajan and smaran as   much   as   possible.      Moreover,   he   should 
physically  serve Bhagvãn and  His sant with shraddhã.    At  the  same 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 242 - 
time,  he  should  abide  by  his dharma and  believe  himself  to  be 
fulfilled.” 
9.7
  Again, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Kali-Yug prevails  in  the  heart  of  a 
person  who  has  accumulated  many tãmasi karmas.    Is  there  any 
method to eradicate those karmas, or not?” 
 
9.8
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “If he has intense shraddhã and extremely 
firm  faith  in  the  words  of Bhagvãn and  His sant,  then  whatever  type 
of tãmasi karmas he  may  have  performed,  they  will  be  destroyed.  
The dharma of Kali-Yug will also vanish, and the dharma of Satya-Yug 
will  prevail.    Therefore,  if  a  person  practices satsang with  absolute 
honesty,  then  no  fault  will  remain  in  his  heart,  and  he  will  become 
brahm-rup in this very lifetime.” 
 
9.9
 Then,  Svayamprakãshãnand  Swãmi  asked,  “What  can  be  called 
sthãn?” 
 
9.10
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “An individual’s dharma according  to  the 
four varnas and the four ãshrams should be known as sthãn.  You are 
all tyãgis,  but  if  you  were  to  leave  this ãshram and  tread  the  path  of 
grahasthas,  then  you  would  be  known  to  have diverted  from  your 
sthãn.   So, even  in  the most  difficult  circumstances,  or  even if I  were 
to   issue   an ãgnã,   you   should   not   deviate   from   your dharma.  
Moreover,  while grahasthas wish  to  perform  my pujã by  offering 
clothes  and  jewellery,  you  should  not  wish to  do  so.    Instead,  you 
should offer pujã by  using  leaves,  flowers, fruits,  and  water,  and  you 
should  experience  joy  by  performing  this pujã.    It  would  not  be 
appropriate  for  you  to  deviate  from  your dharma to  perform pujã of 
Bhagvãn.    Therefore,  all  of  you  should  remain  within  your  own 
dharma,  and  offer pujã within  your  capacity.    This  is  my ãgnã,  so 
abide by it firmly.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur || 9 || 87 || 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 243 - 
Sãrangpur – 10 
Dharma And Adharma 
 
10.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Shrãvan  vad 14  [6
th
 September,  1820], 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  walking  with  all  the sãdhus  from  Kundal  and, 
along  the  way,  they  arrived  at  Khãmbhdã.    They  settled  themselves 
under   a   pipal   tree.      The   people   of   the   village   then   brought   a 
decorated bedstead for Shreeji Mahãrãj to sit upon.  He was dressed 
entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of sãdhus,  as  well  as haribhaktas 
from  various  places,  had  gathered  before  Him.    Some  of  the sãdhus 
were singing kirtans. 
 
10.2
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then asked the sãdhus to stop singing, and addressed 
the village people, “In this world there are two types of people:  
Those  who  follow  the  path  of  honesty  (dharma)  and  those  who 
follow  the  path  of  sin  (adharma).    Of  these,  the  person  who  follows 
the path of honesty, abandons stealing, adultery, slander and all other 
forms  of  sin.    Fearing Bhagvãn,  such  a  person  remains  within  the 
disciplines of dharma.  As a result, everyone in the world trusts him, 
be it a member of his family or anyone else; and whatever he says is 
accepted by all as the truth.  A person who follows dharma, likes the 
company of a true sant. 
 
10.3
 “On the other hand, a person who follows the path of sin(adharma), 
is  engrossed  in  evil  deeds  such  as  stealing,  adultery,  eating  meat, 
drinking alcohol, changing someone’s varna and ãshram by force, and 
having  his  own varna and ãshram changed  by  force.    As  a  result,  no 
one  in  the  world  ever  trusts  him.    In  fact,  even  his  own  relatives  do 
not trust him.  Such a sinful person never likes the company of a true 
sant;  and  if  someone  else  were  to  keep  the  company  of  a sant,  the 
sinful person would spite him too. 
 
10.4
 “Therefore, a person who aims to attain kalyãn, should not follow the 
path of sin (adharma).  Instead, he should follow the path of honesty 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 244 - 
(dharma),  and  keep  the  company  of  a  true sãdhu.   As  a  result,  he 
would certainly, without a doubt, attain kalyãn.” 
 
10.5
 Hearing  this  talk,  many  people  of  the  village  accepted  the  refuge  of 
Shreeji Mahãrãj.   
 
10.6
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  returned  to  Sãrangpur,  and  sat  on  a  decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda outside  the  north-facing  rooms  of  Jeevã 
Khãchar’s darbãr.  He was dressed entirely in white clothes.  A sabhã 
of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before Him. 
 
10.7
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “If a person looks at the dhãms of Bhagvãn 
– Golok, Vaikunth, Shvet-Dvip, Brahmpur – from    a    physical 
perspective,  they  appear  to  be  very  far  away.    However,  if  a  person 
looks  at  them  from  the ãtmã’s perspective,  they  are  not  even  an 
atom’s distance away.  Therefore, the understanding of a person who 
views from a physical perspective is false, and the understanding of a 
person who views from the perspective of the ãtmã is true.  In reality, 
Bhagvãn and  the dhãm of Bhagvãn are not even an atom’s distance 
away  from  a sãdhu who  believes, ‘Bhagvãn  is  forever  present  in  my 
chaitanya.  Just like the jeev resides in the body, Bhagvãn resides within 
my jeev.  My jeev is the sharir, and Bhagvãn is the shariri of my jeev’.  
Such a sãdhu also believes that his jeevãtmã is distinct from the three 
bodies – sthul, sukshma,  and kãran – and  that Bhagvãn forever 
resides  within  his ãtmã.    Such  a sant is  like  a mukta of Shvet-Dvip.  
When  a  person  has  the darshan of  such  a sant,  he  should  realise, ‘I 
have had the darshan of Bhagvãn Himself’.  A person who has such an 
understanding has nothing more to attain. 
 
10.8
 “If a person is unable to attain such an understanding, then he should 
maintain profound associations with a sant.  If that sant were to daily 
beat him five times with a pair of shoes, he should still tolerate such 
insults.  In no way should he abandon his association with a sant, just 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 245 - 
as  an  opium  addict  cannot  abandon  his  addiction.    Such  a  person 
should  be  known  to  be  equal  to  the sant mentioned  earlier.    Also, 
whatever  that sant attains,  a  person  who  continues  to  profoundly 
associate with such a sant, also attains.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur || 10 || 88 || 
 
 
Sãrangpur – 11 
Personal Effort 
 
11.1
 In the Samvat year 1877, on Shrãvan vad Amãs [7
th
 September, 1820], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  north-facing  rooms  of  Jeevã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Sãrangpur.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from various places, 
had gathered before Him. 
 
11.2
 Then,  Muktãnand  Swãmi  asked  a  question:  “Personal  effort  is 
mentioned  in  the shãstras,  but  how  much  is  actually  achieved  by 
personal effort, and how much is achieved by Bhagvãn’s grace?” 
 
11.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “A person who, by the words of a sadguru 
and  the shãstras,  has  attained  firm vairãgya,  has  firm shraddhã, 
strictly   follows   the   eight   types   of brahm-chãrya,   has   affection 
towards ahinsã, and absolutely firmly realises himself to be the ãtmã, 
is  relieved  of  the  burden  of  births  and  deaths  which  hangs  over  his 
head.    Then,  just  like  a  grain  of  rice  that  has  had  its  outer  chaff 
removed does not grow, a mukta who has the gun just mentioned, is 
freed  from  eternal  ignorance  in  the  form  of mãyã.  He  is  therefore 
freed  from  the  cycle  of  births  and  deaths,  and  attains  the  state  of 
ãtmã-nishthã.  This much can be achieved by personal effort. 
 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 246 - 
11.4
 “Bhagvãn’s grace  is  only  bestowed  upon  a  person  who  has  these 
characteristics.    When  he  attains  the  grace  of Bhagvãn,  he  becomes 
an ekãntik bhakta.  Even the Shrutis state: 
 
niranjanaha paramam sãmyam-upaiti 
 
“The meaning of this Vedic shlok is that a person who is free from the 
blemishes of mãyã, attains qualities similar to those of Bhagvãn.  Just 
as Bhagvãn is  never  bound  by  any  pure  or  impure karmas  that  He 
may  perform,  the mukta is  also  never  bound  by  pure  or  impure 
karmas. 
 
11.5
 “Due  to  her  love, Lakshmiji sometimes   becomes   absorbed   in 
Bhagvãn’s murti,   whereas   on   other   occasions,   while   remaining 
separate  from Bhagvãn,  she  remains  in Bhagvãn’s sevã.    In  the  same 
way,   out   of   intense   love,   the bhakta also   sometimes   becomes 
absorbed in Bhagvãn,  and  at  other  times  he  is  separate  and  remains 
in Bhagvãn’s sevã.    Moreover,  just  as Bhagvãn is  independent,  that 
bhakta also   becomes   independent.      These   powers   can   only   be 
attained by the grace of Bhagvãn.” 
 
11.6
 Then, Nityãnand Swãmi asked, “Bhagvãn’s grace  is  bestowed  upon  a 
person  who  has  absorbed  all  these  characteristics  perfectly.    But, 
what  becomes  of  a  person  who  has  some  deficiency  in  developing 
these characteristics?” 
 
11.7
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If a person has a deficiency in any of the 
qualities  of vairãgya, brahm-chãrya, shraddhã, ahinsã,  and ãtmã-
nishthã,   then   he   does   not   attain ãtyantik moksh,   and Bhagvãn’s 
Akshardhãm.  Instead, he attains some other dhãm of Bhagvãn.  If he 
has  even  more  worldly  desires  remaining,  he  attains  the loks of  the 
devs.    In  the Moksh-Dharma,  these loks are  described  as  being  like 
Narak compared to the dhãm of Bhagvãn.  Then, after being a dev, he 
returns to being a human, and from being a human he again becomes 
a dev. 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 247 - 
anek-janma-sansiddh-stato yãti parãm gatim 
A yogi who has become siddh after many lives, attains Akshardhãm. 
 
“This shlok explains  that  a bhakta of Bhagvãn who  has  worldly 
desires does not go to Narak, nor does he have to undergo births and 
deaths   in   the   cycle   of   8.4   million   life-forms.      Instead,   he   takes 
innumerable births as a dev and a human being.  Then, only when he 
develops   the   previously   described   qualities   of vairãgya, brahm-
chãrya, shraddhã, ahinsã,  and ãtmã-nishthã,  does  he  become  worthy 
of  attaining  the  grace  of Bhagvãn.    He  then  becomes  an ekãntik 
bhakta of Bhagvãn, and attains His gunãtit dhãm, Akshardhãm. 
 
11.8
 “So, whether it takes one life or innumerable lives, only when a 
person    develops    the    previously    described    characteristics    and 
becomes  extremely  free  of  worldly  desires,  does  he  become  worthy 
of  attaining  the  grace  of Bhagvãn,  and  only  then  will  he  attain 
ãtyantik moksh.  Without it, he will definitely not attain it.” 
 
11.9
 Then, Nrusinhãnand Swãmi asked, “Is there a method by which a 
person can eradicate all of his deficiencies within this very lifetime?” 
 
11.10
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If a person becomes extremely vigilant and 
determined,  then all  of  his  deficiencies can  be  eradicated  within  this 
very lifetime.  If his deficiencies have not been eradicated while he is 
alive,  and  if  he  were  to  become  free  of  worldly  desires and  develop 
intense love for Bhagvãn during his last moments, then even in those 
last  moments Bhagvãn would  shower  His  grace  upon  him,  and  he 
would attain the dhãm of Bhagvãn. 
 
11.11
 “Therefore, whether after one life, or after countless lives, or even in 
the  last  moments  before  a  person  dies,  should  a bhakta’s vruttis 
become intensely focused on Bhagvãn, no deficiency would remain in 
that bhakta.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur || 11 || 89 || 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 248 - 
Sãrangpur – 12 
Thinking About The Ãtmã 
 
12.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Bhãdarvã  sud 1  [8
th
 September,  1820], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  north-facing  rooms  of  Jeevã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Sãrangpur.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from various places, 
had gathered before Him. 
 
12.2
 Then,  Nirvikãrãnand  Swãmi  asked  a  question:  “Which  qualities 
constantly remain in a sãdhu, and which qualities come and go?” 
 
12.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “First, there is ãtmã-nishthã; second, there is 
svadharma;  and  third,  there  is nishchay in  the svarup of Bhagvãn.  
These  three  qualities  constantly  remain  in  a sãdhu,  whereas  others 
may come and may go.  Therefore, while other qualities come and go, 
these three qualities will always remain.” 
 
12.4
 Then,  Muktãnand  Swãmi  asked,  “Why  is  it  that  even  after 
understanding  the  distinction  between  the  body  and  the ãtmã,  a 
person forgets that distinction, and continues to identify himself with 
the body?” 
 
12.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “Once a person has clearly understood the 
distinction  between  the  body  and  the ãtmã,  it  cannot  be  forgotten.  
Even if he believes, ‘I am the body’, he can no longer accept himself as 
the body.  Also, once he has firmly established the belief of Bhagvãn, 
even  if  he  tries  to  reject  it,  it  cannot  be  rejected.    Furthermore,  the 
belief that his understanding of ‘I am an ãtmã’ has been lost, and the 
belief   that ‘I  am  the  body’ has   begun   to   prevail,   is   simply   a 
misconception of his mind.  The belief never actually returns.  Such a 
bhakta with  perfect gnãn is  conscious  only  of  his ãtmã.    Also,  he 
believes  his ãtmã to  be brahm-rup,  and  that Purushottam Bhagvãn, 
who   is Parbrahm,   forever   resides   in   that brahm-rup ãtmã.      In 
addition to this, his belief of Bhagvãn remains forever steady.” 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 249 - 
12.6
 Then, Svayamprakãshãnand Swãmi asked, “How should a person 
think of his ãtmã?” 
 
12.7
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “When the drashtã (the jeevãtmã) focuses on 
the antah-karan, it becomes unaware of the outer sthul body, and all 
the vishays related  to  it.    Then,  with  the  thought  that  rests  between 
the antah-karan and  the drashtã,  a  person  should  realise  the  nature 
of  the man,  the buddhi,  the chitt,  and  the ahankãr.    A  person  should 
then  observe  the  various  immoral  thoughts  within  the antah-karan.  
Then,   only   when   those   immoral   thoughts   end,   should   a   person 
perform dhyãn on Bhagvãn’s murti.    However,  as  long  as  those 
immoral   thoughts   and   desires   persist,   a   person   should   keep 
observing them, but he should not perform dhyãn at that time. 
 
12.8
 “In addition, when the five gnãn-indriyas of  the  outer sthul body  are 
drawn towards their respective vishays, a person should think in two 
ways:    Firstly,  he  should  think  about  the vishay towards  which  the 
indriyas have  been  drawn.    Secondly,  he  should  think  about  the 
drashtã who  watches  from  the organ  of  the indriya.    Then,  when  the 
first  thought  of  the vishay and  the  second  thought  of  the drashtã 
merge  into  one,  his vrutti becomes  completely  detached  from  the 
vishays.    However,  if  he  does  not  think  in  this  way  and  attempts  to 
break his vrutti from the vishays forcefully, then the vrutti’s attraction 
towards  the vishays will  not  be  eradicated.    On  the  other  hand,  if  he 
withdraws  his vrutti by  applying  this  thought  process,  his vrutti will 
never again become attached to the vishays.  Therefore, as long as the 
vruttis of a person’s indriyas have affection for the vishays, he should 
avoid  performing dhyãn of Bhagvãn.    Only  when  the vruttis of the 
indriyas become stable should he perform the dhyãn of Bhagvãn. 
 
12.9
 “Also, when the drashtã is  active  in  the  outer sthul body,  a  person 
should  be  absolutely  clear  in  making  the  distinction  that  when  he  is 
active  in  the sthul body,  he  should  never  look towards  the  desires 
arising  in  the sukshma body;    and  when  a  person  is  active  in  the 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 250 - 
antah-karan, he should become unaware of his sthul body.  Moreover, 
using  the  thought  which  rests  between  the drashtã and drashya,  he 
should realise, ‘The drashtã and drashya are absolutely distinct’.  With 
this  understanding,  a  person  should  assign  the  features  of  the  body, 
to  the  body,  and  the  features  of  the drashtã,  which  is chaitanya,  to 
chaitanya.    Also,  childhood,  youth,  old  age,  fatness,  thinness,  birth, 
and  death, are  all  aspects  of  the  body.    Therefore,  they  should  never 
be  thought  of  as  belonging  to  the ãtmã.    On  the  other  hand,  being 
achhedhya, abhedhya,  not  aging,  immortal,  full  of gnãn,  blissful,  and 
eternal,  are  all  aspects  of  the ãtmã.    They  should  in  no  way be 
considered  to  belong  to  the  body.    Instead,  those  characteristics 
should be understood to belong to the ãtmã. 
 
12.10
 “These thoughts should not be abandoned as long as desires and 
immoral thoughts persist in the antah-karan.   Take the example of a 
king:  As long as he is confronted by an enemy, he cannot preside on 
his throne in peace, nor does he indulge in any pleasures.  Only when 
all  of  his  enemies  are  conquered,  does  he  enjoy  the  luxuries  of  his 
kingdom.    Similarly,  a bhakta of Bhagvãn should  firmly  keep  these 
thoughts, as long as the enemies (his mind and indriyas) continue to 
trouble him.  Only when all the desires of his mind and indriyas have 
diminished, should he perform dhyãn of Bhagvãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur || 12 || 90 || 
 
 
Sãrangpur – 13 
Losing Nishchay And Not Losing Nishchay 
 
13.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Bhãdarvã  sud 2  [9
th
 September,  1820], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  north-facing  rooms  of  Jeevã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Sãrangpur.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from various places, 
had gathered before Him. 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 251 - 
13.2
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Can a person who previously had 
nishchay in Bhagvãn,  but  later  lost  it,  really  be  said  to  have  had 
nishchay in the first place?” 
 
13.3
 Svayamprakãshãnand  Swãmi  replied,  “If  a  person  has  developed 
nishchay in   his jeevãtmã,   he   would   not   lose   it   by   any   means.  
However, if his nishchay is based on the writings in the shãstras, then 
when Bhagvãn performs  some  action  that  is  not  mentioned  in  the 
shãstras, he would lose his nishchay in Bhagvãn.” 
 
13.4
 “Hearing this, Shreeji Mahãrãj then said,  “In the shãstras,  there  are 
an  endless  variety  of  talks  describing Bhagvãn as  being powerful  as 
well  as  weak,  as  being  the  all-doer  as  well  as  a  non-doer.    So  then, 
which  action  not  mentioned  in  the shãstras could Bhagvãn possibly 
have  performed,  which  causes  a  person  to  lose  his nishchay?    Please 
answer this question.” 
 
13.5
 The munis replied, “No action of Bhagvãn is outside the shãstras.  So, 
what  is  the  reason  behind  a  person  developing nishchay and  then 
losing it?” 
 
13.6
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “It is only through the shãstras that  a 
person  develops nischay.  This  is  because  the shãstras describe  the 
characteristics of Bhagvãn as well as the characteristics of a sant.  So, 
only nishchay developed  through  the shãstras remains  firm.    On  the 
other hand, nishchay developed by a person’s own mind, without the 
help of the shãstras, eventually dissolves. 
 
13.7
 “The shãstras are also the inspiration behind the activities of dharma.  
The  fact  that  an  ignorant  person,  who  has  never  heard  the shãstras, 
has  been  able  to  follow  the  disciplines  of dharma to  this  day,  in  the 
form  of  making  distinctions  between  his  mother,  sister,  daughter, 
and  other  women,  is  due  to  the shãstras.    How  is  that?    Well,  it  has 
been  passed  down  through  the  generations  after  someone  initially 
heard   the   talks   from   the shãstras.      From   that,   it   has   spread 
throughout  society  through  successive  generations.    Therefore,  a 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 252 - 
person who develops nishchay in Bhagvãn and loses it afterwards has 
no nishchay in  the  words  of  the shãstras.    Such  a  person  is  stubborn 
and a nãstik. 
 
13.8
 “On the other hand, if a person does have nishchay in the shãstras, he 
would  never  turn  away  from Bhagvãn.    This  is  because  the shãstras 
describe an endless variety of charitras of Bhagvãn.  So, regardless of 
which  actions Bhagvãn performs,  it  will  never  be  outside  of  the 
shãstras.  Therefore, only a person who has nishchay in the shãstras is 
able  to  develop  unshakeable nishchay in Bhagvãn,  and  only  such  a 
person  attains kalyãn.    In  addition,  such  a  person  would  never 
deviate from dharma.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur || 13 || 91 || 
 
 
Sãrangpur – 14 
Laziness And Infatuation 
 
14.1
 In the Samvat year 1877, on Bhãdarvã sud 3 [10
th
 September, 1820], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  facing  west  on  a 
decorated   bedstead   on   the   veranda   outside   the   rooms   of   Jeevã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Sãrangpur.    He was  wearing  a  black-bordered, 
white khes,  and  had  covered  Himself  with  a  white chãdar.    He  had 
also  tied  a  white pãgh around  His  head.    Bunches  of  yellow  flowers 
were  placed  above  His  ears,  and  tassels  of  yellows flowers  had  been 
placed upon His pãgh.  In addition to this, a garland of yellow flowers 
was  hanging  from  His  neck  down  to  His  navel.    A sabhã of munis,  as 
well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
14.2
 Svayamprakãshãnand Swãmi then asked a question: “It is said in the 
Geetã  that  once  a bhakta attains  the dhãm of Bhagvãn,  such  as 
Vaikunth, he never falls back from it.  But, which flaw causes some to 
fall back?” 
 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 253 - 
14.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj asked in return, “Who has attained the dhãm of 
Bhagvãn and then fallen back?  Give me even one example!” 
 
14.4
  Svayamprakãshãnand Swãmi replied, “First of all, there are Jay and 
Vijay,  the pãrshads of Bhagvãn who  fell  from Vaikunth.    Then,  there 
are Radhikãji and Shreedãmã, who fell from Golok.” 
 
14.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then clarified, “Jay and Vijay did fall, but it was only 
because Bhagvãn wanted  to  illustrate  the  glory  of  a sãdhu.    If  a 
person  insults  a sãdhu,  like  the Sanakãdik,  then  even  if  he  has 
attained  a dhãm like Vaikunth,  he  can  still  fall  from it.    That  is  why 
they  fell.    In  addition,  Jay  and  Vijay  did  return  to Bhagvãn’s dhãm, 
Vaikunth,  in  their  third  life.    Therefore,  they  cannot  be  said  to  have 
fallen;  it  happened  because  it  was Bhagvãn’s wish.    In  any  case,  a 
person  can  only  be  said  to  have fallen  when  he  never  again  retains 
any contact with Bhagvãn. 
 
14.6
 “Also, when Rãdhikãji fell from Golok, that too was by Bhagvãn’s wish, 
as   He   Himself   wished   to   incarnate   in   a   human   body   to   uplift 
countless jeevs   and   perform kalyãn-kãri actions.      Therefore,   if 
someone  claims  that Rãdhikãji fell,  then Bhagvãn could  be  said  to 
have  fallen  along  with  her.    That  is  why  she  cannot  be  said  to  have 
fallen,  because  it  was Bhagvãn’s wish  that  they  both  came  to  earth 
from Golok.  So, in this instance, it should be recognised as being the 
wish of Bhagvãn only. 
 
14.7
 “Of course, if it is His wish, a mukta may  incarnate  in  a  body  even 
from Akshardhãm.    Moreover,  by  His  will,  that  which  is jad can 
become chaitanya, and that which is chaitanya can become jad.  After 
all, Bhagvãn is extremely powerful,  and  whatever He  wishes,  occurs.  
Therefore,  no  one  who  has  attained  the dhãm of Bhagvãn falls  back 
from it without it being Bhagvãn’s wish.  However, a person who does 
fall, is a worldly incomplete bhakta, who falls during the course of his 
spiritual activities.  Such a person is called ‘yog-bhrasht’.  In contrast, 
those who have become siddh through vairãgya, ãtmã-nishthã, bhakti 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 254 - 
towards Bhagvãn,  and brahm-chãrya,  are  equal  to  the muktas of 
Shvet-Dvip.  They never fall.” 
 
14.8
 Having  explained  this,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “Now,  I  shall  ask  a 
question.” 
 
14.9
 The munis responded, “Please do ask.” 
 
14.10
 Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “In the Udyog-Parva  of  the  Mahãbhãrat,  Sanat-
Sujãt Rushi says to Dhrutrãshtra, ‘He who abandons both laziness and 
infatuation has completely disobeyed Bhagvãn’s mãyã.  In fact, laziness 
and infatuation are mãyã itself’.  Now,  we  are  known  to  be tyãgi 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn.      If   someone   amongst   us   has   laziness   and 
infatuation,   and   if   that   person   is   not   particularly   vigilant   in 
eradicating them by using the strength of Bhagvãn’s glory, then what 
type of bliss does such a bhakta experience in this body?  Also, what 
type of bliss does he attain after he dies?  That is my question.” 
 
14.11
 Svayamprakãshãnand  Swãmi replied, “A person who is a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn need not worry too much if his laziness and infatuation are 
not eradicated by the deep thought of Bhagvãn’s glory.” 
 
14.12
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then questioned, “What is wrong with a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn who has laziness and infatuation and is vigilant in his efforts 
to  eradicate  them?    What  makes  a  person  who  is  not  so  vigilant 
better than the person who is?” 
 
14.13
 Svayamprakãshãnand  Swãmi  explained, “That bhakta of Bhagvãn 
relies on the strength of Bhagvãn, not on the strength of his spiritual 
activities.  That is why he is better.” 
 
14.14
 Shreeji Mahãrãj questioned further, “You are claiming that a person 
who is careless, despite the enemies of laziness and infatuation being 
prevalent  in  him,  is  superior.    Well,  consider  the  example  of  a pati-
vratã wife.  Due to the fear of her husband, and the fear of preserving 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 255 - 
her pati-vratã  dharma,  she  remains  very  conscious  in  her  mind,  in 
case  she  smiles  at  or  touches  another  man.    Moreover,  in  her  mind 
lies the following fear:  ‘If I behave freely, my husband will think of me 
as  an  adulteress,  and  will  no  longer  accept  my  sevã.    This  would  be  a 
breach  of  my  pati-vratã dharma’.  Bearing  this  in  mind,  she  remains 
ever  vigilant.    So,  you  are  claiming  that  a bhakta who  keeps bhakti 
just  like  the pati-vratã wife  and  who  is  conscious  in  his  efforts  to 
eradicate  laziness  and  infatuation  is  at  fault.    Furthermore,  you  are 
suggesting  that  a bhakta who  is  not  concerned  about  eradicating 
laziness  and  infatuation,  like  a  woman  who  flirts  with  any  man  she 
fancies, and is not concerned about preserving her fidelity, is actually 
superior!    Is  this  because  of  a  misunderstanding  on  your  behalf,  or 
what? 
  
14.15
 “Remember, if a person remains careless, then even if he is a bhakta 
of Bhagvãn,  the  two  enemies  of  laziness  and  infatuation  would  not 
fail  to  hinder  him.    For  example,  when  a  person  drinks  alcohol  or 
bhãng, then   just   as   a vimukh becomes   intoxicated,   a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn would  also  become  intoxicated  and  delirious.    In  the  same 
way, just as alcohol and bhãng in the form of laziness and infatuation 
affect a vimukh, they affect a bhakta of Bhagvãn as well.  However, the 
only  difference  between  a vimukh and  a bhakta of Bhagvãn is  that  a 
vimukh cannot  eradicate  these  two  enemies,  whereas  a bhakta can 
overcome  them  if  he  remains  vigilant  in  his  efforts.    That  is  the 
advantage a bhakta of Bhagvãn has.  Nevertheless, he is not better if 
he remains careless, even if he is a bhakta of Bhagvãn.” 
 
14.16
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked another question:  “How many elements 
is   the sthul body   composed  of,   and   how   many   elements   is   the 
sukshma body  composed  of?    Are  there  equal  elements  in  both,  or 
does  one  have  more  or  less  than  the  other?    Please  describe  the 
nature of these two bodies.” 
 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 256 - 
14.17
 Svayamprakãshãnand  Swãmi  attempted  to  answer  the  question,  but 
was  unable  to  do  so  adequately.    Then,  all  the munis said, “Mahãrãj, 
please be kind enough to answer this question yourself.” 
 
14.18
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then explained, “The sthul body  is  composed  of  the 
five tattvas known  as  the  five mahã-bhuts,  such  as pruthvi and jal.  
The sukshma body  is  composed  of  nineteen tattvas:    the  five gnãn-
indriyas,  the  five karma-indriyas,  the  five prãns,  and  the  four antah-
karans.    Yet,  only  when  the sukshma body  is  interwoven  with  the 
sthul body,   can   all   activities   be   carried   out   properly,   but   not 
otherwise.    This  is  because  only  when  the sukshma body,  together 
with the indriyas, joins the sthul body – which includes the organs of 
the indriyas,  such  as  the  eyes  and  ears – can  the vishays of  those 
indriyas be  indulged  in.    This  is  not  possible  by  the  organs  of  the 
indriyas of   the sthul body   alone.      Therefore,   the sukshma body 
composed  of  the  nineteen tattvas is  interwoven  with  the sthul body 
composed of the five tattvas (five mahã-bhuts).  That is why the sthul 
body is also said to be composed of twenty-four tattvas. 
 
14.19
 “In the same way, the pleasures  of  the sukshma body  can  only  be 
indulged  in  when  the sukshma body  behaves  as  one  with  the sthul 
body, which is composed of the five tattvas.  That is why the sukshma 
body,  which  is  composed  of  nineteen tattvas,  is  also  said  to  be 
composed  of  twenty-four tattvas.    Moreover,  because  the sthul body 
is inherent within the sukshma body, when a person associates with a 
woman through his sukshma body, he ejaculates semen from his sthul 
body.    Therefore,  there  is  unity  between  the sthul body  and  the 
sukshma body during the jãgrat state and the svapna state.” 
 
14.20
 Then,  the munis remarked, “Mahãrãj, this suggests that the sukshma 
body  is  the  same  as  the sthul body.    So,  just  as  there  is  an  effect  of 
karmas  on  the sthul body,  is  there  a  similar  effect  on  the sukshma 
body as well?  Or is there a difference?” 
 
14.21
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If a person has just as strong a belief that 
the sukshma body is ‘mine’, as he has that this sthul body is ‘mine’, 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 257 - 
then  the  law  of karmas  would  apply  to  the sukshma body  just  as  it 
does to the sthul body.  Indeed, it is only to encourage the individual 
that   the karmas   of   the sukshma body   have   been   said   to   be 
insignificant. 
 
14.22
 “In comparison, neither the sthul body  nor  the sukshma body  of  a 
person who has no consciousness of his sthul and sukshma bodies, is 
affected  by karmas.    This  is  because  such  a  person  behaves  only  as 
the ãtmã.    Therefore,  a  person  who  has  such ãtmã-nishthã,  remains 
unaffected   by karmas   related   to   the sthul and sukshma bodies.  
Nonetheless,  such  a  person  would  never  physically  perform  any 
impure karmas.    Furthermore,  he  endures  any  joy  or  pain  resulting 
from his prãrabdha.  Even while experiencing them, he believes, ‘I am 
not the one who experiences.  I am the ãtmã’. 
 
14.23
 “On the other hand, a person who  is  ignorant  and  who  perceives 
himself  with  the  body,  is  affected  by  all karmas  related  to  the sthul 
and sukshma bodies,  and  therefore  he  experiences  joy  and  pain 
according  to  his karmas.    This  is  because  an  ignorant  person,  while 
experiencing  whichever vishays he  indulges  in,  believes  the  body  to 
be  his  true svarup,  and  feels, ‘I am the one who experiences these 
vishays’. 
 
14.24
 “Then, in his final moments, such an ignorant person sees yamduts.  
He   then   becomes   unaware   of   his   body   and   enters   a   state   of 
unconsciousness.    The yamduts force  him  to  leave  his  body  and 
therefore separate his jeev.  The jeev then receives the body of an evil 
spirit,  in  which  it  suffers the  torments  of Yampuri.  In  comparison,  a 
bhakta of Bhagvãn possessing gnãn,  sees Bhagvãn or  His sant in  his 
last  moments.    He  also  becomes  unaware  of  his  body  and  enters  a 
state  of  unconsciousness.    However,  when  that bhakta discards  his 
body and becomes separate from it, Bhagvãn grants him a divya body 
like that of Bhagvãn, with which he resides in the dhãm of Bhagvãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur || 14 || 92 || 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 258 - 
Sãrangpur – 15 
Mugdhã, Madhyã, And Praudhã Gopis 
 
15.1
 In the Samvat year 1877, on Bhãdarvã sud 4 [11
th
 September, 1820], 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on  the  veranda 
outside the rooms of Jeevã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Sãrangpur.    He  was 
dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
15.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “I shall ask a question.  There are two 
types  of bhaktas of Bhagvãn:    A  person  has  such  deep  love  for 
Bhagvãn that he cannot bear even a second without His darshan.  His 
love   is   very   obviously   noticeable.      Another bhakta of Bhagvãn 
possesses  knowledge  of  the ãtmã as  well  as  total vairãgya.    He  also 
has love for Bhagvãn, but his love does not appear to be like the love 
of the first bhakta.  Furthermore, although the first bhakta’s bhakti is 
extremely  appealing,  he  possesses  neither  knowledge  of  the ãtmã 
and vairãgya,  but  his bhakti is  not  as  appealing  as  the  first bhakta’s.  
Of  these  two bhaktas,  whose bhakti is  superior,  and  whose bhakti is 
inferior?  That is the question.” 
 
15.3
 To  this,  Svayamprakãshãnand Swãmi replied, “He who has intense 
love for Bhagvãn is better, even if he does not have knowledge of the 
ãtmã and vairãgya.” 
 
15.4
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then questioned, “With what understanding do you 
say that he who does not have knowledge of the ãtmã and vairãgya is 
better?    Such  a  person  believes  himself  to  be  the  body,  and  so 
whenever  he  comes  upon  any  of  the panch-vishays that  comfort  his 
body,  he  will  develop  affection  for  them.    As  a  result,  his  love  for 
Bhagvãn will diminish.  So why do you consider him to be superior?” 
 
15.5
 Svayamprakãshãnand Swãmi clarified, “I do not consider the person 
who  develops  affection  for  the vishays to  be  a bhakta who  loves 
Bhagvãn.    Instead,  I  consider  the  person  who  is  like  the gopis to  be 
such a bhakta.” 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 259 - 
15.6
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “The gopis were not so naïve.  They 
were  so  wise  that  their  wisdom  could  go  beyond  the  understanding 
of  those  who  do  possess knowledge  of  the ãtmã and vairãgya.    They 
also  spoke  as  expressively  as  those  who  are  educated  in diplomacy.  
In  addition,  they  knew Bhagvãn precisely  as  He  should  be  known.  
Even  Uddhavji,  the  wisest  of  the Yãdavs and Bhagvãn’s adviser, 
became  overwhelmed  when  he  realised  the gopis’ understanding.  
That same Uddhavji later said, ‘Bhagvãn has shown great mercy to me 
by sending me to impart gnãn to the gopis’.  He  had  actually  gone  to 
preach   to   the gopis,   but   upon   hearing   their   words,   he   himself 
absorbed in the preaching of the gopis. 
 
15.7
 “Though you may say that the gopis were  not  very  intelligent,  there 
were   three   distinctions   amongst   them: mugdhã, madhyã,   and 
praudhã. 
 
15.8
 “Of these, the characteristics of the mugdhã gopis are  as  follows:  
They  would  often  lecture Bhagvãn and  say, ‘We have gone out of our 
way  doing things  for  you, yet  you  do  not  take  even  the  slightest  notice 
of us’.  Furthermore, if they were teased further, they would be upset 
with Bhagvãn, and speak such harsh words that a person would feel 
they  will  soon  fall  from  the  path  of Bhagvãn.    The gopis who  are 
described  in  this  way  in  the shãstras,  should  be  known  as mugdhã 
gopis. 
 
15.9
 “Those  who  are madhyã gopis,  would  never  become  angry  with 
Bhagvãn and  would  never  speak  such  harsh  words.    However,  by 
using  their shrewdness,  they  would  use  cunning  methods  to conceal 
their selfishness from others and do whatever they please while also 
doing whatever pleases Bhagvãn.  Therefore, they would not do only 
that  which  pleases Bhagvãn.    Furthermore,  even  if  they  have  to  do 
something  that  pleases  only Bhagvãn,  they  would  definitely  use  a 
cunning method  to  do  whatever  pleases  themselves  as  well.    The 
gopis, who are described in this way in the shãstras, should be known 
as madhyã gopis. 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 260 - 
15.10
 “In comparison, praudhã gopis would  do  only  that  which  pleases 
Bhagvãn.    In  no  way  would  they  use  any  cunning  methods  to  satisfy 
their  selfishness.    Their  only  wish  would  be  to  please Bhagvãn.  
Therefore, they remain happy with whatever pleases Bhagvãn.  Also, 
they would never become angry at, or jealous of the other gopis who 
are equal to them.  They would also abandon vicious natures, such as 
mãn and matsar,  and  remain  alert  in  the sevã of Bhagvãn.    They 
would  never  do  anything  by  thought,  word,  or  deed  that  would 
displease Bhagvãn.    The gopis who  are  described  in  this  way in  the 
shãstras,  should  be  known  as praudhã gopis.    In  this  way,  there  are 
three distinctions amongst the gopis. 
 
15.11
 “Overall, the gopis had  extreme  wisdom  in  their  understanding,  and 
therefore  their  love  cannot  be  said  to  be  without  understanding.  
Also, they had thoroughly understood the greatness of Bhagvãn.  Due 
to   the   power   of   that   understanding   of Bhagvãn’s greatness,   the 
qualities  of ãtmã-nishthã and vairãgya naturally  flourished  in  their 
hearts.      Therefore,   it   was   due   to   the   power   of   understanding 
Bhagvãn’s greatness   that   countless kalyãn-kãri qualities, such   as 
ãtmã-nishthã and vairãgya, were fully developed in the gopis. 
 
15.12
 “The characteristics of such a bhakta are  as  follows:    He  wishes  for 
only those panch-vishays (shabda, sparsh, rup, ras,  and gandh) which 
are   related   to Bhagvãn,   but   not   for   those   which  are   related   to 
anything else.  Then, through those vishays, he develops intense love 
for Bhagvãn.    The  love  is  so  intense  that  even  though  he  does  not 
possess  the  qualities  of ãtmã-nishthã and vairãgya,  he  still  does  not 
have any other desire in his heart, except the desire for Bhagvãn. 
 
15.13
 “Consider the following example:  When it has not rained, the seeds 
of  any  types  of  grass  cannot  be  seen  anywhere  on  the  earth.    But, 
when it does rain, so much grass grows that even the earth cannot be 
seen.  Similarly, when a person who does not possess the qualities of 
ãtmã-nishthã and vairãgya meets  with kusang,  though  he  may  seem 
to  have  no  desire  for vishays other  than Bhagvãn,  he  will  begin  to 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 261 - 
have  desires  for  those  objects.    Furthermore,  his  mind  will  become 
corrupted,  and  he  will  not  remember Bhagvãn in  his  heart.    Instead, 
he will constantly crave for the vishays.  As a result, that bhakta who 
loves Bhagvãn, but does not possess the qualities of ãtmã-nishthã and 
vairãgya,  will  feel, ‘I do not have even the slightest love for Bhagvãn’.  
Therefore,  a bhakta who has  love  for Bhagvãn,  but  does  not  possess 
the qualities of ãtmã-nishthã and vairãgya, is extremely inferior. 
 
15.14
 “In comparison, a bhakta whose  love  for Bhagvãn seems  ordinary, 
but  who  has  the  qualities  of ãtmã-nishthã and vairãgya,  feels, ‘The 
murti of Bhagvãn is forever present within my jeevãtmã’.  Because  of 
this ãtmã-nishthã,  he  may  not  seem  outwardly  enthusiastic  for  the 
darshan and  touch  of Bhagvãn’s murti.    In  fact,  he  may  appear  to  be 
very quiet.  However, the roots of his love are very deep.  Moreover, 
his  love  is  not  the  type  that  would  diminish  due  to  the  influence  of 
kusang.  Therefore, this bhakta is superior, and is ekãntik.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur || 15 || 93 || 
 
 
Sãrangpur – 16 
Nar-Nãrãyan Dev’s Tap In Badrikãshram 
 
16.1
 In the Samvat year 1877, on Bhãdarvã sud 5 [12
th
 September, 1820], 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on  the  veranda 
outside  Jeevã  Khãchar’s darbãr in   Sãrangpur.      He   was   dressed 
entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
16.2
 Paramãnand  Swãmi  then  asked  a  question:  “It  is  said  in  the 
Shreemad  Bhãgvat, ‘While residing in Badrikãshram, Nar-Nãrãyan 
Rushi is performing tap for the sake of the kalyãn and happiness of all 
the  people  in  Bharat-Khand’.  So,  why  is  it  that  everyone  does  not 
walk a path of kalyãn?” 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 262 - 
16.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “The answer lies in the fifth skandh of the 
Shreemad Bhãgvat.  It is said, ‘Bhagvãn is performing tap, but he does 
so only for the sake of his bhaktas, not for those who are not bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn’. 
 
16.4
 “Nar-Nãrãyan Bhagvãn,  who  is  dressed  in  the  clothes  of  a tapasvi, 
performs harsh tap out of extreme compassion, and for the benefit of 
those people who realise the rarity of attaining a human body in this 
Bharat-Khand,  and  therefore  attain  the  refuge  of Bhagvãn and  offer 
bhakti to  Him.    While  performing tap,  and  gifted  with  qualities, like 
dharma, gnãn, vairãgya, upsham,  divine  powers,  that  are  constantly 
present in Him to a great extent, he dwells in Badrikãshram until the 
destruction  of  the  universe.    Therefore,  even  if  His bhaktas who  live 
in Bharat-Khand may possess the qualities, such as dharma and gnãn, 
to  a  lesser  degree,  they  flourish  greatly  in  just  a  short  span  of  time 
due  to  the  power  of Bhagvãn’s great tap.    Then,  by  the  will  of 
Bhagvãn,  these bhaktas receive  the darshan of  the pratyaksha murti 
of Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn amidst  the  divine  light  of Akshar-Brahm 
that  is  in  their  hearts.    In  this  way,  due  to Bhagvãn’s tap, bhaktas 
attain kalyãn without  any  difficulties.    However,  those  who  are  not 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn do  not  attain kalyãn.   This  is  the  answer  to  your 
question.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur || 16 || 94 || 
 
 
Sãrangpur – 17 
Differences Among Muktas 
 
17.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on  the  evening  of Bhãdarvã  sud 6  [13
th
 
September,  1820],  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  facing  north  on  a 
decorated   bedstead   on   the   veranda   outside   the   rooms   of   Jeevã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Sãrangpur.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from various places, 
had gathered before Him. 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 263 - 
17.2
 Then Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “As the vision of a person who worships 
Bhagvãn becomes increasingly weak, he realises the unlimited nature 
of Bhagvãn,  and  he  increasingly  realises  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn.  
When  that bhakta identifies  himself  with  the  body,  he  sees Bhagvãn 
as the witness of his jãgrat, svapna, and sushupti states.  Later, when 
he  realises himself  as  beyond  the jãgrat, svapna,  and sushupti states, 
he realises Bhagvãn as beyond them too.  Then, as his vision becomes 
increasingly  weak,  he  realises Bhagvãn as  being  far  beyond  himself 
and  understands  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn even  more.    Then,  as  his 
vrutti attaches   itself   more   and   more   to Bhagvãn with   love,   his 
upãsanã of Bhagvãn becomes even more firmly established. 
 
17.3
 “For  example,  ants,  birds,  men,  cattle,  horses,  elephants,  large 
crocodiles,  and  fish,  all  drink  water  from  the  ocean  and  become 
healthy, but the ocean’s level is not even slightly reduced.  Therefore, 
the  greater  the capacity  of  the  creature,  the  more  it  understands the 
vastness of the ocean. 
 
17.4
 “Here is another example:  A mosquito, a sparrow, a kite, a hawk, an 
analpakshi,  and Garud all  fly  in  the  sky,  yet  to  all  of  them  the  sky  is 
limitless.  However, the greater the strength of their wings, the more 
they understand the vastness of the sky and their own inferiority. 
 
17.5
 “Similarly, a bhakta whose upãsanã is  like  that  of  Marichi  and  other 
prajãpatis,  can  be  compared  to  the  mosquito.    A bhakta, whose 
upãsanã is higher, like that of devs such as Brahmã, can be compared 
to  the  sparrow.    A bhakta, whose upãsanã is  higher  still,  like  that  of 
devs such  as Virãt-Purush,  can  be  compared  to  a  kite.    A bhakta, 
whose upãsanã is  higher  still,  like  that  of Pradhãn-Purush,  can  be 
compared  to  a  hawk.    A bhakta, whose upãsanã is  still  higher,  like 
that  of  pure Prakruti and Purush,  can  be  compared  to  an analpakshi.  
A bhakta, whose upãsanã is even higher, like that of an Akshar mukta 
in Akshardhãm,   is   like Garud.      As   the   powers   of   these bhaktas 
increase,  they  recognise  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn more  and  more.  

SÃRANGPUR 
- 264 - 
Moreover,   as   their   own   powers   increase,   their   master-servant 
relationship with Bhagvãn is also strengthened. 
 
17.6
 “Also, when the person engaged in worship and identified himself 
with  the jeev,  the jeev possessed  the  luminosity  of  a  firefly.    As  he 
continued  worshipping Bhagvãn,  the  eight  barriers  (jad  prakruti) 
were  gradually  overcome,  and  he  became  increasingly  luminous – 
first  like  an  oil  lamp,  then  like  a  torch,  then  like  the  flames  of  a  fire, 
then like  the  flames  of  a  forest  fire,  then  like  lightning,  then  like  the 
moon,  then  like  the  sun,  then  like  the  fire  of  destruction, and  finally, 
he became as radiant as the light of Akshar-Brahm. 
 
17.7
 “In this way, the luminosity, powers, and bliss of such a bhakta 
constantly  increase.    In  the  example,  the  sequence  from  firefly  to 
Akshar-Brahm refers to the difference among the level of muktas.  As 
a  person  reaches  a  higher  spiritual  state, Bhagvãn’s greatness is 
realised to a greater extent, and he attains a higher mukta level.” 
 
17.8
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then bid “Jay Sachidãnand” to everyone and stood 
up.  Then, holding a branch of the tamarind tree, He stood facing east 
and said, “From here, the full moon appears like a small plate.  But, as 
a  person  approaches  it,  it  appears  to  get  increasingly  large.    Then, 
when  he  comes  extremely  close  to  it,  it  becomes  so  vast  that  he  is 
unable to see its limits.  Similarly, as obstacles (mãyã) are overcome 
and   a   person   increasingly   attains   the   proximity   of Bhagvãn,   he 
realises the unlimited greatness of Bhagvãn.  As a result, his sense of 
servitude towards Bhagvãn is increasingly strengthened.” 
 
||End of Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur || 17 || 95 || 
 
   
Sãrangpur – 18 
Saline Land 
 
18.1
  In the Samvat year 1877, on Bhãdarvã sud 8 [15
th
 September, 1820], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  facing  north  on  the 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 265 - 
veranda outside the north-facing rooms of Jeevã Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Sãrangpur.    He  was  wearing  a  white khes and  had  covered  Himself 
with a white chãdar.  He had also tied a white pãgh around His head.  
A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had 
gathered before Him. 
 
18.2
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “If a person with shraddhã comes  across 
the  company  of  a  true sant and  develops shraddhã in  the  words  of 
that sant,  then  all  the kalyãn-kãri qualities  of svadharma, vairãgya, 
gnãn, bhakti, and wisdom, would develop in his heart, and the vicious 
natures, such as kãm, and krodh, would be burnt away.  On the other 
hand, if he encounters kusang  and develops shraddhã in their words, 
then the qualities such as vairãgya and wisdom would be destroyed.  
 
18.3
 “It is like the analogy of saline land.  No matter how much rain falls 
upon  it,  no  grass,  or  anything  else,  can  grow  upon  it.    However,  if  a 
flood were to sweep across the same land, then all the salt would be 
washed  away.    As  a  result,  where  there  was  once  salt,  there  would 
now  be  silt.    If  the  seeds of  banyan,  pipal,  or  other  trees  were  to  fall 
into that silt, they would grow into large trees.  Similarly, if a person, 
who  has  the  previously  mentioned  qualities  of svadharma, vairãgya, 
gnãn, bhakti, and wisdom, firmly rooted in his heart, and who has not 
even the slightest desire for the pleasures of this world, were to meet 
with kusang, then waters (kusang) would sweep across his heart and 
leave  behind silt  (worldly  talks).    Then,  the  seeds  of  vicious  natures, 
such  as kam, krodh, lobh, moh, mad,  and matsar,  which  are  dormant 
in  the  silt,  would  grow  into  large  trees.    Therefore,  a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn should never keep kusang.” 
 
18.4
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj continued, “If a person has some svabhãvs and 
he thoughtfully attempts to eradicate them by associating with a sant, 
then they can be destroyed.  However, a person’s vicious svabhãvs 
will  not  eradicate  if  he  foolishly  applies  any  other  methods.    When 
such  a  fool  becomes  depressed,  he  either  sleeps,  cries,  takes  out  his 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 266 - 
frustrations  on  someone  else,  or  he  may  even  do upvãs.    He  will  use 
any  of  these  four  methods  to  try  to  overcome  his  depression.    If  he 
becomes  severely  depressed,  he  may  even  resort  to  committing 
suicide.    These  are  the  way  in  which  a  fool  attempts  to  overcome 
depression.  However, such methods neither reduce the pain, nor do 
they eradicate a person’s svabhãvs.    On  the  other  hand,  if a  person 
were to attempt to eradicate them with understanding, then both the 
distress and the svabhãv would be eradicated.  Therefore, only those 
who have understanding become happy.” 
 
18.5
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  continued  with  another  example  and  said, 
“Large flames of a fire are extinguished when water is poured over it, 
whereas  even  a  slight  flash  of  lightning  can  never  be  extinguished, 
even  though  it  is  in  the  midst  of  dense  rain  clouds.    Similarly, 
regardless  of  how  much vairãgya a  person  may  have,  or how  much 
love  for Bhagvãn he  may  have,  if  he  does  not  have  understanding, 
then  like  the  flames  of  the  fire,  all  of  his  qualities  will  be  lost  due  to 
water (kusang).  In comparison, a person who has the understanding 
of vairãgya and love is like the fire of lightning.  It may be slight, but it 
is never destroyed.” 
 
18.6
 “Then,  Nirvikãrãnand  Swãmi  asked,  “Mahãrãj,  if  a  person  has  a 
vicious svabhãvs, like kãm and krodh, can they be eradicated, or not?” 
 
18.7
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Just as a merchant keeps an  account  of  all 
his  transactions,  if  a  person  keeps  an  account  of  his svabhãvs from 
the  very  day  he  entered satsang,  then  they  can  be  eradicated.    He 
should think, ‘When I was not in satsang, I had these vicious svabhãvs.  
But,  ever  since  I  have  entered  satsang, they have diminished’.  Then, 
every  year, he should check  to see  if  he  has  progressed  or  if  there  is 
still  some  deficiency  remaining.    However,  a  fool  does  not  keep  an 
account  like  the  merchant  does.    Therefore,  any svabhãvs,  which  a 
person  may  have,  can  be  eradicated  if  he  continuously  examines 
himself while doing satsang.” 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 267 - 
18.8
 Muktãnand Swãmi then asked, “If a person keeps kusang then  it  is 
obvious that he will develop vicious svabhãvs.  But, why is it that such 
vicious svabhãvs arise even after a person associates with a sant?” 
 
18.9
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “During his childhood, a person does not 
face enemies, such as kãm, krodh, and lobh.  Also, at that age, he also 
tends  to  have  more  love  for Bhagvãn.    However,  when  he  enters 
youth, the enemies increase along with the belief that he is the body.  
During that period, if he keeps the company of a sãdhu, who does not 
have  vicious  natures  and  the  belief  that  he  is  the  body,  then  he  will 
cross the ocean of youth.  However, if the youth does not do this, the 
enemies will defeat him, and he will consequently turn vile. 
 
18.10
 “However, if an older person is spoilt while doing satsang,  it  is 
because  whichever avgun he  perceives  in  a  great sant,  all  return  to 
dwell in his own heart.  Conversely, if he perceives the gun of a great 
sant and  thinks, ‘Any svabhãvs the great sant exhibits is only for the 
sake of the kalyãn of jeevs.  In fact, He is flawless; but my identification 
of flaws in him is due to my own personal foolishness’, and he also asks 
for forgiveness for his mistakes, then his deficiencies will diminish. 
 
18.11
 Mahãnubhavãnand Swãmi then asked, “Can rãjasi, tãmasi, and sãttvik 
svabhãvs be eradicated by doing satsang?” 
 
18.12
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj replied, “All svabhãvs can  be  eradicated  if  a  person 
tries to eradicate them.” 
 
18.13
 Mahãnubhavãnand Swãmi asked further, “If that is the case, then 
despite  the  fact  that  Durvãsã  and  others  have  become muktas,  why 
do they still remain tãmasi?” 
 
18.14
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “The qualities, like tamo-gun,  which  are 
seen in Durvãsã and others, are only present because they choose to 
keep them.  They feel, ‘If someone is misbehaving, tamo-gun is actually 

SÃRANGPUR 
- 268 - 
very  necessary  in  order  to  lecture  him.    That is why we keep it’.  
Therefore, they purposely retain these qualities.  Nevertheless, when 
a svabhãv is prevalent in a person, he should have hatred towards it.  
He  should  think, ‘I  am  a  bhakta of Bhagvãn,  and  such  a  vicious 
svabhãv does not suit me’.  In this  way,  by  the  grace  of Bhagvãn,  a 
person’s svabhãvs can  be  eradicated  if  he  regards  them  as  flaws  and 
strives to discard them.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Sãrangpur || 18 || 96 || 
 
 
|| End of Shree Sãrangpur Prakaran ||

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 269 - 
|| SHREE SWÃMINÃRAYAN VIJAYTETRÃM || 
 
 
VACHANÃMRUT 
Shree Kãriyãni Prakaran 
 
Kãriyãni – 1 
A Worm And A Bee 
 
1.1
 In the Samvat year 1877, on Bhãdarvã sud 12 [19
th
 September, 1820], 
a  decorated,  canopied  bedstead  that  had  been  brought  by  Jãdavji 
Bhakta from  Surat,  had  been  placed  on  the  veranda  outside  the 
north-facing rooms of Vastã Khãchar’s darbãr in Kãriyãni.  A mattress 
with  a  white,  silken  cover  had  been  placed  upon  the  bedstead.    A 
large,  white,  cylindrical  pillow  and  red,  silken  knee-cushions  had 
been placed on the mattress.  Also, frills of gold fabric were dangling 
on  all  four  sides  of  the  bedstead.    Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  facing 
north  on  this  beautifully  decorated  bedstead.    He  was  wearing  a 
white khes with a black border, and had tied a white feto with a gold 
border  around  His  head.    Also,  He  had  covered  Himself  with  a shelu 
with  a  gold  border.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him.  They were all staring at the 
charming  appearance  of Shreeji  Mahãrãj,  just  as chakors stare  at  the 
moon with fixed eyes.  
 
1.2
 Then,   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   said   to   the paramhans,  “Please  begin  a 
question-answer discussion amongst yourselves.” 
 
1.3
 Bhudharãnand Swãmi then asked, “Does nishchay in Bhagvãn arise in 
the antah-karans or in the jeev?” 
 
1.4
 Shivãnand Swãmi attempted to answer the question, but was unable 
to do so satisfactorily.  
 
1.5
 So Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “The jeev knows through the buddhi, which is 
the  cause  of  all  knowledge,  and  is  greater  than  all.    That buddhi 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 270 - 
resides in the man, in the chitt, in the ahankãr, in the ears, in the eyes, 
in the nose, in the tongue, in the mouth, in the skin, in the arms, in the 
legs,  in  the  genitals,  and  in  the  anus.    It  resides  in  the  body  in  this 
way,  pervading  it  from  head  to  toe.    The jeev resides  within  this 
buddhi.  However, the jeev is not felt, only the buddhi is felt.   
 
1.6
 “The following example will illustrate this:  When the flames of a fire 
rise and fall, they do so because of the wind.  The rise and fall of the 
flames  are  apparent,  but the  wind is  not  apparent.    Also,  when  dung 
is  placed  in  fire,  the  dung  begins  to  burn.  Then,  when  it  is  placed 
where there is no wind, smoke begins to rise.  At that time, the rising 
smoke  is  apparent,  but  the  wind  within  is  not  apparent.    Also,  the 
clouds that move in the sky are seen to do so because of the wind, but 
the  wind  that  resides  within  them  is  not  apparent.    In  this  way, 
flames,  smoke,  and  the  clouds  represent  the buddhi,  and  the  wind 
represents the jeev. 
 
1.7
 “What is that jeev like?    Well,  the jeev is  the  knower  of  the  beliefs 
formed by the buddhi, and it also knows Brahmã, who is the cause of 
the  beliefs  in  the buddhi.    The jeev knows  the  thoughts  of  the man, 
and  also  knows Chandra,  who  is  the  cause  of  those  thoughts  in  the 
man.    The jeev knows  the  remembrance  in  the chitt,  and  also  knows 
Vãsudev, the cause of the thinking in the chitt.  It knows the ‘I-ness’ of 
the ahankãr, and also knows Rudra, the cause of that ‘I-ness’.  In this 
way,  the jeev perceives  the  four antah-karans,  the  ten indriyas,  and 
the vishays,   and   their   presiding devs,   who   allow   a   person   to 
discriminate   among   those vishays.      The jeev does   all   of   this 
simultaneously. 
 
1.8
 “That jeev appears  to  be  in  one  place;  it  appears  to  be  as  fine  as  the 
tip  of  a spear;  and it  appears  to  be extremely  subtle.    It  appears  this 
ways because it is associated with the buddhi.  But, when that jeev is 
known as the illuminator of the body, the indriyas, the antah-karans, 
the vishays, and their presiding devs, it appears to be extremely vast, 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 271 - 
and   it   appears   to   be   pervasive.      That   is   when   the jeev is   not 
associated with the buddhi. 
 
1.9
 “That jeev is not known by the indriyas, but is known by assumption.  
For  example,  on  seeing  a  sword  weighing  two  hundred  kilograms,  a 
person can infer, ‘The carrier of this sword must be extremely strong’.  
Similarly,  the jeev inspires  the  body, indriyas,  the antah-karans,  the 
vishays, and their presiding devs, simultaneously; therefore it must be 
very  powerful.    This  is  how  the jeev can be known by assumption.”  
Shreeji Mahãrãj answered the question in this way. 
 
1.10
 Nityãnand  Swãmi  then  asked, “Mahãrãj, what is the answer to the 
original question in what you have just said?” 
 
1.11
 Shreeji Mahãrãj clarified, “Well, the answer is that when the belief of 
Bhagvãn has  developed  in  the buddhi,  a  person  should  realise  that 
the belief has also developed within the jeev.  How does that happen?  
Well, the belief initially develops in the indriyas, then in the ahankãr, 
then in the chitt, then in the man, then in the buddhi, and then finally, 
it develops in the jeev.”  This was Shreeji Mahãrãj’s reply. 
 
1.12
 Again, Nityãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, how  can  a  person  know 
when  there  is  belief  of Bhagvãn in  the indriyas?    How  can  a  person 
know when there is belief of Bhagvãn in the antah-karans?  How can 
a person know when there is belief of Bhagvãn within the jeev?” 
 
1.13
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “The  belief  of Bhagvãn which  is  in  the 
indriyas should be known as follows:  Of all the objects in this world 
which are seen, heard, smelt, or touched, some are pleasant and some 
are  unpleasant;  some  give  pleasure  and  some  give  misery;  some  are 
liked  and  some  are  disliked;  some  are  appropriate  and  some  are 
inappropriate.  If no doubts arise even when all these characteristics 
are  apparent  in Bhagvãn,  that  should  be  known  to  be  the  belief  of 
Bhagvãn in the indriyas. 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 272 - 
1.14
 “Furthermore,  of  the  various  effects  of  the  three gun (sattva-gun, 
rajo-gun, and tamo-gun), the effect of tamo-gun is laziness and sleep; 
the effect of rajo-gun is lust and anger; and the effect of sattva-gun is 
tranquillity and self-discipline.  If no doubts arise even when all these 
are  noticed  in Bhagvãn,  then  that  should  be  known  as  the  belief  of 
Bhagvãn in the antah-karans. 
 
1.15
 “Due to nirvikalp samãdhi, Rushabh-Dev Bhagvãn wandered  crazily, 
keeping  a  stone  in  his  mouth.    Although  his  body  burned  in  a  forest 
fire,  he  remained  totally  unaware  of  it.    So,  if  no  doubts  arise  even 
when such a gunãtit state is apparent in Bhagvãn, then that should be 
known as belief of Bhagvãn in the jeev. 
 
1.16
 “For example, ships that travel in the sea carry an iron anchor with 
them.    When  thrown  into  the  sea,  if  that  anchor  is  immediately 
retracted   before   it   reaches   the   seabed,   then   not   much   effort  is 
required;  it  comes  out  of  the  sea  immediately.    However,  if  it  is 
allowed  to  reach  the  seabed  before  it  is  retracted,  then  it  comes  out 
only after great effort.  But, if it is allowed to descend gradually, and it 
settles  and  lodges  itself  into  the  seabed,  then  it  cannot  be  pulled  up 
by  any  means;  it  cannot  be  retracted.    Similarly,  when  a  person 
develops  the  belief  of Bhagvãn in  the jeev,  that  belief  cannot  be 
dislodged in any way whatsoever.”  Shreeji Mahãrãj spoke at length 
in this way, but only a small section has been mentioned here. 
 
1.17
 Then, Chaitanyãnand  Swãmi  asked, “Mahãrãj, Bhagvãn is  greater 
than  the mind  and speech,  and  He is gunãtit.   So, how can  the mãyik 
indriyas and antah-karans perceive Him?” 
 
1.18
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “When the jeev – the  knower  of  the  body, 
indriyas, and antah-karans – becomes  merged  during  the sushupti 
state,  its indriyas and antah-karans also  become  merged  in  that 
sushupti state.  At the time, Bhagvãn inspires that jeev.  When the jeev 
enters  the svapna state  from  the sushupti state,  the  dream-related 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 273 - 
locations, pleasures, vishays, and the jeev are all inspired by Bhagvãn.  
He  inspires  them  during  the jãgrat state  as  well.    In  this  way, 
Bhagvãn inspires  the jeev both  when it is  conscious  of  the  body,  and 
when  it  is  not.    Also,  from Pradhãn, maha-tattva was  formed;  from 
maha-tattva,  the  three  types  of ahankãr were  formed;  from  that 
ahankãr, the indriyas, devs, five mahã-bhuts, and five tan-mãtras were 
formed;   all   these   are   also   inspired   by Bhagvãn.    Virãt,   who   is 
composed of all these tattvas combined, is also inspired by Bhagvãn.  
When  all  of  these  merge  into Mãyã, Bhagvãn inspires  that Mãyã as 
well. 
 
1.19
 “That Bhagvãn also  inspires  both jeev and ishvar when  they  identify 
themselves  with  their  bodies.    He  inspires  both jeev and ishvar even 
when  they  reside  in  the sushupti state,  and  are  merged  by Pradhãn 
and  are  without  any  identify  or  form.    He  inspires Kãl,  which  causes 
Mãyã and  other  entities  to  assume  an  identity  and  form,  and  also 
causes  them  to  abandon  their  identity  and  form.    So,  how can  that 
Bhagvãn be  known  by  the indriyas and antah-karans?    Is  that  your 
question?” 
 
1.20
 Everyone confirmed, “Yes, Mahãrãj, that is the question.” 
 
1.21
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  continued,  “The  answer  to  that  is  as  follows: 
Bhagvãn does not create and sustain the world for His own sake.  In 
fact, it is said in the Shreemad Bhãgvat: 
 
buddhindriya-manah-prãnan janãnãm-asrujat-prabhuha 
matrãtham cha bhavãrtham cha hyãtmane kalpãnaya cha 
 
“This shlok means: Bhagvãn created  the buddhi, indriyas, man,  and 
prãns of all people to enable the jeevs to indulge in the vishays, to take 
birth,  to  transmigrate  to  other loks,  and  to  attain kalyãn.    Therefore, 
Bhagvãn created this universe for the sake of the kalyãn of the jeevs; 
Bhagvãn sustains  it  for  the  sake  of  the kalyãn of  the jeevs;  and 
Bhagvãn also  causes  its  destruction  for  the  sake  of  the kalyãn of  the 
jeevs.  How is that?  Well, He destroys it to allow the jeevs – who are 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 274 - 
tired as a result of undergoing many births and deaths – to rest.  That 
Bhagvãn,  who  acts  in  all  ways  for  the  benefit  of  the jeevs,  becomes 
like  a  human  out  of  compassion.    Then,  when  the jeevs maintain 
profound  association  with  a sant of  that Bhagvãn,  why  should  they 
not be able to know Him?  They can certainly know Him.” 
 
 
1.22
 Then, Bhajanãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, why then does the Vedic 
shlok claim:  
 
yato vãcho nivartante aprãpya manasã saha 
From where speech returns along with the mind without having attained 
Brahm and Bhagvãn. 
 
1.23
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied in a pleased tone, “Well, in that case, the facts 
are  as  follows: pruthvi resides  in ãkãsh,  but  does  not  become  like 
ãkãsh; jal also  resides  in ãkãsh,  but  does  not  become  like ãkãsh; tej 
also  resides  in ãkãsh,  but  does  not  become  like ãkãsh;  and vãyu also 
resides  in ãkãsh,  but  does  not  become  like ãkãsh.    In  the  same  way, 
the mind and speech do not attain Bhagvãn.” 
 
1.24
 Then, Nityãnand Swãmi raised a doubt:  “Mahãrãj, the Shrutis and 
Smrutis claim:   
 
niranjanaha paramam sãmyam-upaiti 
He who is free from the blemishes of mãyã, attains qualities similar to those of 
Bhagvãn 
 
bahavo gnãna-tapasã pootã mad-bhãva-mãgataha 
Many who have been purified by tap in the form of gnãn have attained my 
qualities. 
 
1.25
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “What I just mentioned is regarding the 
mind and the indriyas of a vimukh.  However, the mind and indriyas of 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn do  become merged  with Bhagvãn.    For  example, 
at  the  time  of  destruction, pruthvi,  which  resides  in ãkãsh,  becomes 
one  with ãkãsh; jal also  becomes  one  with ãkãsh; tej also  becomes 
one with ãkãsh; and vãyu also becomes one with ãkãsh.  Similarly, the 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 275 - 
bodies, indriyas, antah-karans, and prãns of those who are bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn, due to their gnãn of Bhagvãn, become like Bhagvãn.  This is 
because Bhagvãn’s murti itself  is divya.    So,  the  bodies, indriyas,  and 
antah-karans of those bhaktas become like Bhagvãn’s indriyas, antah-
karans, and body.  That is why the bodies, indriyas, antah-karans, and 
prãns of those bhaktas, become divya. 
 
1.26
 “Take the following example: A bee captures a worm, stings it, and 
then buzzes over it.  As a result, that worm – in the very same body – 
is transformed into a bee.  Then, none of its bodily parts remain like 
that  of  a  worm; it  becomes  exactly  like  a  bee.    Similarly,  a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn, in that very same body, becomes divya like Bhagvãn.” 
 
1.27
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then concluded by saying, “The essence of this talk 
that I have given is for both a person with firmness in bhakti coupled 
with ãtmã-nishthã,  and  for  a  person  with  firmness  in bhakti alone, 
progress is as described.  However, the indriyas and antah-karans of a 
person  with ãtmã-nishthã only  do  not  become divya like Bhagvãn’s 
murti; he attains only brahm-sattã.” 
 
1.28
 Having spoken in this way, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Now, let us stop 
this  talk,  as  the sabhã has  become  quiet.   Someone please  sing  some 
pleasing kirtans.”  Saying this, He Himself began to perform dhyãn, 
while the sãdhus began singing kirtans. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Kãriyãni || 1 || 97 || 
 
 
Kãriyãni – 2 
A Cursed Intellect 
 
2.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Ãso  sud 2  [9
th
 October,  1820],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  the  veranda  outside  the 
north-facing rooms of Vastã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Kãriyãni.    He  was 
dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 276 - 
2.2
 By Shreeji Mahãrãj’s ãgnã,  the  junior paramhans had  come  to  the 
front of the sabhã and were asking and answering questions amongst 
themselves. 
 
2.3
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Allow me to ask one question.” 
 
2.4
 The junior paramhans responded by saying, “Mahãrãj, please do ask.” 
 
2.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “One person’s intellect is such that since 
the  day  he  joined satsang,  he  may  occasionally  perceive avgun in 
Bhagvãn and  His sant,  but  it  does  not  persist,  and then  passes  away.  
Day by day, he may continue perceiving gun and avgun, but he never 
abandons satsang.  This is because he is wise and realises, ‘There is no 
sant  like  this  in  the  entire  brahmãnd,  and  there  is  no  other  Bhagvãn 
besides his Mahãrãj’.  As  he  has  realised  this,  he  remains  firm  in 
satsang.  On the other hand, another person’s intellect is such that he 
never  perceives avgun in Bhagvãn or  His sant.    But,  even  though  the 
intellects of both bhaktas are outwardly similar, and their nishchay in 
Bhagvãn is  also  similar,  one  person  continues  perceiving avgun, 
while  the  other  does  not.    What  is  the  fault  in  the  intellect  of  the 
person  who  keeps  perceiving avgun?    I  put  this  question  to  Nãnã 
Shivãnand Swãmi.” 
 
2.6
 Nãnã  Shivãnand  Swãmi  then  attempted  to  answer  the  question,  but 
was unable to do so adequately. 
 
2.7
 Then, Bhagvadãnand Swãmi said, “That person’s intellect is cursed.” 
 
2.8
 At that point, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “He is correct.  That is the correct 
answer to the question.  In the world, do people not say, ‘He has been 
cursed by someone?’  In the same way, that individual has been cursed 
because  he  may  have  hurt  a  great sant,  he  may  have  hurt  a  humble 
person,  or  he  may  not  have  served  his  parents.    That  is  why  his 
intellect is the way it is.” 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 277 - 
2.9
 Then, Bhagvadãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, how can his cursed 
intellect be healed?” 
 
2.10
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “This piece of cloth which I wear on my 
head  and  a  thick  cloth  like  a  rug  cannot  be  washed  with  the  same 
amount   of   effort.      This   is   because   this   thin   cloth   is   cleaned 
immediately by washing it with only a small amount of soap.  On the 
other hand, to wash a thick cloth, it must be soaked in water for two 
to four days, and then boiled over a fire.  Only then, after it is washed 
with soap, does it become clean.  Similarly, if a person whose intellect 
is  cursed  follows niyams only  to the  extent  that  everyone  else  does, 
then  that avgun will  not  be  eradicated.    He  should  not  only  remain 
free  of kãm, svãd, lobh, moh,  and mãn as  others.    Instead,  he  should 
become more free of kãm than others; he should become more free of 
lobh than others; he should become more free of svãd than others; he 
should  become  more  free  of moh than  others.    Also,  he  should  go  to 
sleep  later  than  others;  and  he  should  chant  the  name  of Bhagvãn 
with  a mãlã more  often  than  others;  and  he  should  wake  up  a  little 
earlier  than  others.    In  this  way,  if  he  follows niyams more  intensely 
than  others,  his  cursed  intellect  will  be  healed;  otherwise  it  will  not 
be healed.” 
 
2.11
 Then,   Motã   Shivãnand   Swãmi   asked   Motã   Yogãnand   Swãmi   a 
question:  “Do karmas have a form or are they formless?” 
 
2.12
 Motã Yogãnand Swãmi replied, “I do not think I can answer that 
question.” 
 
2.13
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then replied, “In reality, karmas  are  without  a  form, 
but the good or bad fruits which result from those karmas do have a 
form.  Those who claim that karmas have a form are nãstiks.  After all, 
a karma is an action, and so it cannot have a form.” 
 
2.14
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  talked  a  great  deal  in  this  way,  but  only  a  small 
portion has been mentioned here. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Kãriyãni || 2 || 98 || 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 278 - 
Kãriyãni – 3 
Shuk Muni Is A Great Sãdhu 
A Person Cannot Be Known By His Superficial Nature 
 
3.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on  the  evening  of Ãso  vad 7  [14
th
 October, 
1820],   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   facing   north   on   a   decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  north-facing  rooms  of  Vastã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Kãriyãni.   He  was  wearing a  white khes and had 
tied a white feto around His head.  He had also covered Himself with 
a  white chãdar.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 
  
3.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “This Shuk Muni is a very great sãdhu.  
From  the  day  he  began  staying  with  me,  his  enthusiasm  has  been 
ever increasing; in fact, it has never diminished.  Therefore, he is like 
Muktãnand Swãmi.” 
 
3.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then continued, “The affection that people develop 
for each other is due to gun, and the hatred they experience for each 
other  is  due  to avgun.    However,  those gun and avgun cannot  be 
established from a person’s external behaviour.  A person outwardly 
may walk like a cat, fixing his eyes on the floor as he walks, but on the 
inside, he may have intense kãm.  On seeing him behave in this way, a 
person who is not wise would think, ‘He is a very great sãdhu’.  On the 
other hand, someone else may walk with wandering eyes.  On seeing 
him,  a  person  who  is  not  wise  would  think, ‘He is a fake sãdhu’.  
However,  inwardly  he  may  be  extremely  free  of kãm.    Therefore,  a 
person cannot be judged by his external, physical behaviour.  He can 
only  be  judged  after  staying  with  him.    By  staying  with  him,  his 
activities  can  be  observed – the  way  he  talks,  the  way  he  walks,  the 
way  he  eats,  the  way  he  drinks,  the  way  he  sleeps,  the  way  he 
awakens, and the way he sits. 
 
3.4
 “Also, gun and avgun are  more  apparent  during  the  period  of  youth, 
but  they  are  not  so  obvious  during  childhood  or  during  old  age.  

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 279 - 
Someone  may  be  spoiled  as  a  child,  but  as  a  youth  he  becomes 
honourable.  Conversely, someone may be good in his childhood, but 
becomes  spoiled  during  his  youth.    A  person  who  is  determined  in 
that he feels, ‘It is not good that I am having these improper thoughts’, 
and  who  makes  an  effort  to  eradicate  those  thoughts,  and  who 
remains  determined  until  they  have  been  eradicated,  progresses in 
satsang in  his  youth.    On  the  other  hand,  a  person  who  is  careless 
instead  of  being  alert,  will  not  progress.    So,  an  honourable  person 
can be recognised from his childhood.” 
 
3.5
 Having said this, Shreeji Mahãrãj talked at length about His fondness 
for tyãg in His childhood.  He then continued, “A person who is 
honourable does not like the company of immature children from his 
childhood;  he  does  not  have  an  appetite  for  tasty  food; and  he 
continuously  restrains  his  body.    Just  look,  when  I  was  a  child,  I  had 
the same thoughts as Kãrtik Swãmi, and I felt, ‘I want to eliminate all 
the parts of my mother – her flesh and blood – from my body’.  So, after 
many  spiritual  activities,  I  malnourished  my  body  so  much  that  if 
something pierced my body, water would come out, but never blood.  
In  this  way,  a  person  who  is  honourable  can  be  known  from  his 
childhood.” 
 
3.6
 Then, Bhajanãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, is it better to maintain 
this thought in the mind, or is it better to expose the body to tap?” 
 
3.7
 To that, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “The faults due to the body should be 
known,  and  the  faults  due  to  the  mind  should  be  known.    Of  these, 
which  are  the  faults  of  the  body?    Well,  repeated  erections  and 
itching  of  the  genitals,  excessive  movement,  rapid  movement  of  the 
eyes,  smelling  many  types  of  fragrances  quickly,  walking  twenty  or 
twenty-five  miles  quickly,  embracing  someone  with  such  force  that 
his  bones  break,  ejaculating  semen  during  dreams,  and  so  on – all 
these are faults of the body, not the mind.  Even if these faults of the 
body are greatly reduced, lustful desires, as well as desires for eating, 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 280 - 
drinking,   walking,   touching,   smelling,   hearing,   and   tasting,   may 
remain.    These  should  be  known  as  the  faults  of  the  mind.    So,  the 
faults of the body and mind should be distinguished in this way. 
  
3.8
 “Then, the faults of the body should be removed by imposing bodily 
restraints.  Then, once the body is weakened, the remaining faults of 
the  mind  should  be  eradicated  by  thinking, ‘I am the ãtmã, separate 
from desires.  In fact, I am completely blissful’.  A person who practices 
these two methods – bodily restraint and thinking of the ãtmã – is a 
great sãdhu.  If a person has only bodily restraint, but does not think 
of  the ãtmã,  then  it  is  not  appropriate.    Conversely,  if  a  person  only 
thinks  of  the ãtmã,  but  does  not  restrain  his  body,  then  that  is  also 
not  appropriate.   Therefore,  a  person  who  has  both  is  the  best.  
Moreover,  if  these  two  methods – self-discipline  and  thinking – are 
necessary  for  even grahastha satsangis to  practice,  then  a tyãgi 
should definitely practice them.” 
 
3.9
 Then, Nishkulãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, can a person remain like 
that through thinking or through vairãgya?” 
 
3.10
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “A  person  remains  like  that  due  to  the 
company  of  a  great sãdhu.    Furthermore,  a  person  who  is  unable  to 
do so even with the company of a great sãdhu is a great sinner.” 
 
3.11
 Saying that, Shreeji Mahãrãj continued, “If a tyãgi desires  to  indulge 
in the worldly pleasures which are appropriate only for a grahastha, 
then he is as good as an animal eating dry grass.  This is because even 
though he is never going to acquire those objects, he still has a desire 
for them.  It seems that he has not understood that fact properly; and 
as  the  saying  goes,  what  is  the  point  in  asking  the  name  of  a  village 
that a person is not going to visit?  If he does have a craving for those 
objects that he has given up, will it be possible for him to obtain them 
during this lifetime?  He can attain them only if he falls from satsang, 
but   not   while   remaining   in satsang.      Therefore,   a   person   who 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 281 - 
maintains a desire for those pleasures, while remaining in satsang, is 
a  fool.    This  is  because  whoever  remains  in satsang is  required  to 
follow the dharma of a satsangi.  For example, if a woman sets out to 
become a sati but turns back upon seeing the fire, would her relatives 
allow  her  to turn  back?    They  would  force  her  to  burn  on  her 
husband’s funeral pyre.  Also, if a brãhman lady becomes a widow but 
continues  to  dress  like  a married  woman,  will  her relatives  allow  it?  
Certainly   they   would   not.      Therefore,   a   person   who   maintains 
indecent svabhãvs  while  remaining  in satsang has  not  understood 
this  talk.    If  he  had  understood it,  such  indecent svabhãvs  would  not 
remain.” 
 
3.12
 Saying this, Shreeji Mahãrãj bid “Jay Swãminãrãyan” to everyone and 
departed to go to sleep. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Kãriyãni || 3 || 99 || 
 
 
Kãriyãni – 4 
Awareness Of The Jeev, The Buddhi, And The Witness 
 
4.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  four-and-a-half  hours  after  sunrise  on Ãso 
vad 8   [15
th
 October,   1820],   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   the 
veranda outside the north-facing rooms of Vastã Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Kãriyãni.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of 
paramhans, as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered 
before Him. 
 
4.2
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “Please  begin  a  question-answer 
discussion amongst yourselves.” 
 
4.3
 Gopalãnand Swami asked Bhajanãnand Swami, “In this body, how 
much  awareness  is  of  the jeev,  and  how  much  awareness  is  of  the 
witness (Bhagvãn)?” 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 282 - 
4.4
 Bhajanãnand  Swami  attempted  to  answer  the  question,  but  was 
unable to do so. 
 
4.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then replied, “The buddhi pervades  this  body  from 
head to toe.  As a result, it is simultaneously aware of the activities of 
all  the indriyas.    The jeev resides  within  that buddhi by  pervading  it.  
Therefore, the awareness of the buddhi is due to the awareness of the 
jeev.      Similarly,   since   the   witness   resides   within   the jeev,   the 
awareness of the jeev is due to the awareness of the witness.” 
 
4.6
 Nityãnand Swami then asked Shreeji Mahãrãj, “Mahãrãj, the witness 
does  reside  within  the jeev.    But,  realising  that  a  witness  must 
possess a form, the question is how can that which possesses a form 
also be all-pervading?” 
 
4.7
 Hearing  this,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  explained, “That which possesses a 
form  can  also  be  all-pervading.    For  example, Agni-Dev possesses  a 
definite svarup when residing in his lok, but through his powers, he is 
latent  within  wood.    Similarly, Bhagvãn possesses  a  definite  form  in 
His Akshardhãm, but through His antaryãmi powers, He pervades the 
jeevs and  functions  as  if  He  possesses  a  form.    Therefore,  even  that 
antaryãmi form should be considered to possess a form.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Kãriyãni || 4 || 100 || 
 
 
Kãriyãni – 5 
Bhagvãn’s Purpose For Assuming An Avatãr 
 
5.1
 In the Samvat year 1877, on Ãso vad 14 [4
th
 November, 1820], Swãmi 
Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a bedstead with a canopy 
on  the  veranda  outside  the  north-facing rooms of Vastã Khãchar’s 
darbãr in  Kãriyãni.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A 
sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had 
gathered before Him. 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 283 - 
5.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “I wish to ask a question.” 
 
5.3
 The munis responded by saying, “Mahãrãj, please do ask.” 
 
5.4
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Bhagvãn assumes an avatãr on earth to 
grant kalyãn to  the jeevs.    But,  is  He  not  capable  of  granting kalyãn 
while remaining in His dhãm, without assuming an avatãr?  After all, 
Bhagvãn can  grant kalyãn in  any  way  He  wishes.    Then,  what  is  the 
purpose  of  Him  assuming  an avatãr on  earth?    Furthermore,  if 
Bhagvãn can only grant kalyãn when He assumes an avatãr, and He is 
incapable  of  granting kalyãn in  any  other  way,  it  would  suggest  that 
this  is  a  weakness  of Bhagvãn.    But  in  reality, Bhagvãn is  capable  of 
granting kalyãn to  the jeevs by  assuming  an avatãr,  and  He  is  also 
capable  of  granting kalyãn to  the jeevs without  assuming  an avatãr.  
Then,  what  is  the  purpose  of Bhagvãn assuming  an avatãr on  earth?  
That is the question.” 
 
5.5
 The senior sãdhus  answered  according  to  their  own  understanding, 
but were unable to answer Shreeji Mahãrãj’s question adequately.  As 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  raised  doubts  to  their  answers,  their  answers  were 
all  disproved.    The munis then  folded  their  hands  and  requested, 
“Mahãrãj, only you are capable of answering this question.” 
 
5.6
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then explained, “Bhagvãn assumes an avatãr for only 
one  reason:    Having  surrendered  Himself  to  the bhakti of  those 
bhaktas who have intense love for Him, Bhagvãn assumes whichever 
svarup the bhaktas wish  for  in  order  to  grant  them  bliss.    He  then 
fulfils all the desires of His bhaktas.  Since the bhaktas have a physical 
body, Bhagvãn  also  assumes  a  physical  body, and  showers  love  upon 
those bhaktas.    In  addition  to  this, He  suppresses  His  powers  and 
behaves  with  the bhaktas as  a  son,  or  as  a  close  companion,  or  as  a 
friend, or as a relative.  Because of this, the bhakta may not maintain 
much  courtesy  with Bhagvãn.    Nonetheless, Bhagvãn showers  His 
love upon the bhakta in whichever way He desires. 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 284 - 
5.7
 “Therefore, the only reason Bhagvãn assumes an avatãr is to fulfil the 
desires  of  His  beloved bhaktas.    Along  with  this,  He  grants kalyãn to 
innumerable other jeevs and also establishes dharma.  Now, if there is 
any doubt in what I have just said, please speak.” 
 
5.8
  The munis replied, “Mahãrãj, your reply is most appropriate.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Kãriyãni || 5 || 101 || 
 
 
Kãriyãni – 6 
A Person Who Possesses Matsar 
 
6.1
 In the Samvat year 1877, on Ãso vad Amãs [5
th
 November, 1820], the 
day  of  Divãli,  a  row  of  oil  lamps  had  been  arranged  around  a  stage 
which had been assembled in front of the north-facing rooms of Vastã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Kãriyãni.    Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj 
was  sitting  on  a  decorated,  canopied  bedstead  that  had  been  placed 
on  that  stage.    He  was  wearing  a  red survãl made  of kinkhãb with 
golden embroidery.  He was also wearing a black, kinkhãb dagli with 
the words ‘Nar-Nãrãyan-Swãminãrãyan’ imprinted upon it.  Around 
His head He had tied an orange pãgh with a border of golden threads.  
He had also tied a sky-blue coloured feto tightly around his waist, and 
garlands of yellow flowers were hanging around His neck.  A sabhã of 
munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before Him. 
 
6.2
 A  female bhakta from  the  port  of  Deev  had  come  on  that  occasion.  
She  requested  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  to  allow  her  to  perform  His pujã.  
Accepting  her  request,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  came  down  from  His  seat, 
approached the bhakta, and accepted her pujã.  Then, after accepting 
the  clothes,  a  yellow  umbrella,  and  a  pair  of  wooden chãkhadis 
offered by her, He returned to His seat. 
 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 285 - 
6.3
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “For so many years bhaktas have  been 
offering  clothes  and  thousands  of rupees worth  of  jewellery  to  me, 
but I have never gone of my own accord to receive them as I just did.  
Also,  I  have  never  become  as  pleased  by  wearing  the  clothes  and 
jewellery  offered  by  others  as  I  have  just  now.    I  have  become 
extremely pleased upon this bhakta today.” 
 
6.4
 The munis commented, “That bhakta truly does have love.”  In the 
meantime,  Dinã-Nãth  Bhatt  arrived,  bowed  at  the  feet  of  Shreeji 
Mahãrãj, and then sat down.  Shreeji Mahãrãj then gave all the richly 
embroidered clothes to him. 
 
6.5
 Muktãnand Swãmi then asked, “Mahãrãj, by which gun is Bhagvãn 
pleased upon a bhakta?” 
 
6.6
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Bhagvãn is  pleased  with  a bhakta who 
becomes free of kãm, krodh, lobh, kapat, mãn, irshyã, and matsar, and 
then offers bhakti to Bhagvãn.  But, amongst all of those, matsar is the 
root of all avgun.  That is why in the Shreemad Bhãgvat, Shree Vyãsji 
has  noted  that  only  the sãdhu who  is  without matsar is  worthy  to 
possess bhãgvat-dharma.    As  a  result, matsar is  fainter  than  all  the 
other avgun.  Also, it is extremely difficult to eradicate matsar.” 
 
6.7
 Then, Brahmãnand Swãmi asked, “What is the method for eradicating 
matsar?” 
 
6.8
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A person who is a sãdhu,  and  treads  the 
path  of  a sãdhu,  will  be  able  to  eradicate matsar.    However,  if  a 
person does not desire to tread the path of a sãdhu, the matsar within 
him will never be eradicated.” 
 
6.9
 Again, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “What causes matsar?” 
 
6.10
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “There are three causes of matsar:    women, 
wealth, and delicious food.  But, for a person who does not have any 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 286 - 
of  these  three, mãn is  the  cause  of matsar.    Moreover,  for  a  person 
who  possesses matsar,  the  fact  that  I  have  given  these  clothes  to 
Dinã-Nãth  Bhatt,  must  have  led  to matsar.    Such  a  person  would 
never think, ‘The person who brought such richly embroidered clothes 
and  offered  them  to  Mahãrãj should  be  commended.    Mahãrãj should 
also   be   commended   since   He   immediately   gave   them   away   to   a 
brãhman’.  Such a thought would never arise in the heart of a person 
who  possesses matsar.    Even  if  someone  else  gives  something  and 
someone else receives it, a person who possesses matsar burns with 
envy unnecessarily.” 
 
6.11
 “As for me, not even the slightest bit of kãm, krodh, lobh, mãn, matsar, 
or irshyã,  enters  my  heart.    Also,  in  my  heart,  I  experience  a  strong 
hatred for the panch-vishays (shabda, sparsh, rup, ras, and gandh).  In 
fact, I do not have even the slightest interest in any one of the panch-
vishays. 
  
6.12
 “Whenever I accept food or clothes, I do so on seeing the bhakti of the 
bhaktas;  I  never  accept  them  for  own  physical  pleasure.    All  of  my 
actions, like eating, drinking, and wearing clothes, are for the sake of 
all the sãdhus and satsangis.  If I have the feeling that it is for my own 
sake and not for their sake, then I would immediately discard it. 
 
6.13
 “The only reason I keep this physical body is for the sake of the 
satsangis;  besides  that,  there  is  no  other  reason.   Bhaktas such  as 
Mulji  Brahm-Chãri  and  Somlã  Khãchar,  who have  been  staying  close 
to  me  for  so  many  years,  know  my  nature  and  realise, ‘Besides the 
bhaktas  of  Bhagvãn,  Mahãrãj does  not  have  love  for  anything  else.    In 
fact, Mahãrãj is not affected by anything, just like ãkãsh’.  In this way, 
those who constantly stay near me know my nature.  I have sacrificed 
my  body  for  the  sake  of  those  who  are bhaktas of Bhagvãn by  word, 
thought,  and  deed.   Therefore,  in  all  ways, I  am  attached  to  whoever 
is  a bhakta of Bhagvãn.    To  me,  the  wealth  of  the  fourteen loks, 
without the bhaktas of Bhagvãn,  seems  as  worthless  as  a  blade  of 
grass. 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 287 - 
6.14
 “In addition, even those who are bhaktas of Bhagvãn and  have  firm 
love  only  for Bhagvãn,  will  not  find  pleasure  in  the  enticing vishays.  
Although  they  may  sustain  the  body  with  ordinary vishays,  they 
immediately become miserable by attractive vishays.  Therefore, only 
such a person can be considered to be a completely perfect bhakta of 
Bhagvãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Kãriyãni || 6 || 102 || 
 
 
Kãriyãni – 7 
Vairãgya Due To Obsession 
Ãtyantik Kalyãn 
 
7.1
 In the Samvat year 1877, on the night of Kãrtik sud 1 [6
th
 November, 
1820], a  row  of oil  lamps  had  been  arranged  around  a  stage  in front 
of  the  north-facing rooms of Vastã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Kãriyãni.  
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  bedstead  that  had  been  placed  on 
the  stage.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of 
paramhans, as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered 
before Him. 
 
7.2
 Then,  Kãshidãs  of  the  village  of  Bochãsan  asked  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  a 
question:  “Mahãrãj, tyãgis follow the path of nivrutti; therefore, they 
are   able   to   keep   their vrutti constantly   on Bhagvãn.      However, 
grahasthas follow  the  path  of pravrutti;  so,  they  are  plagued  with 
countless  worldly  problems.    What  understanding  must  a grahastha 
maintain in order to fix his vrutti constantly on Bhagvãn?” 
 
7.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The grahastha should believe, ‘Just as I had 
parents,  wives,  and  children  during  my  past  lives  in  the  cycle  of  8.4 
million life-forms, I have the same in this life as well.  In fact, there must 
be   many   mothers,   sisters,   and   daughters   from   many   past   lives 
wandering around, and yet, just as I do not have any sense of ‘my-ness’ 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 288 - 
for them, similarly, I should not keep any sense of ‘my-ness’ for the 
relations  of  this  body either’.  Thinking  in  this  way,  if  he  diverts  his 
affection from everything else, maintains firm affection only towards 
Bhagvãn, and keeps the company of a sãdhu, then even a grahastha’s 
vrutti can remain constantly fixed on Bhagvãn, just like the vrutti of a 
tyãgi.” 
 
7.4
 Hearing these words of Shreeji Mahãrãj, all the grahasthas present in 
the sabhã folded their hands and asked, “Mahãrãj, what will become 
of the grahastha who is unable to behave in that way?” 
 
7.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “I spoke in reference to a person who, 
having eradicated all desires for all objects except Bhagvãn, keeps his 
vrutti constantly  on Bhagvãn.    But,  someone  who  is  not  so  strong 
should  abide  by  the dharma of satsang.    He  should  also rely  on  the 
strength  of Bhagvãn and  His sant,  whose  refuge  he  has  taken,  by 
believing, ‘Bhagvãn is adham-udhãran  and  patit-pãvan,  and  I  have 
attained Him in person’.’’  After hearing these words from Shreeji 
Mahãrãj, the bhaktas became extremely pleased. 
 
7.6
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then asked the sant, “What causes vairãgya to arise?” 
 
7.7
 The sãdhus  replied  according  to  their  understanding,  but  Shreeji 
Mahãrãj’s question could not be answered adequately.  So they said, 
“Mahãrãj, you will have to answer that question.”  
 
7.8
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “Upon hearing the words of the shãstras 
and sat-purush, developing a fascination that does not diminish once 
developed,  is  the  only  cause  for vairãgya;  there  is  no  other  cause.  
Whoever  is  fascinated  in  this  way,  will  develop vairãgya,  regardless 
of  whether  he  is tãmasi, rãjasi,  or sãttvik.    On  the  other  hand,  if  a 
person   does   not   have   such   an   fascination,   he   will   not   develop 
vairãgya.  Also, if someone’s fascination diminishes after a few days, 
then  the vairãgya that develops  can  cause  tremendous  harm.    How?  

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 289 - 
Well, when he does have the fascination, he renounces and leaves his 
home.    Then,  after  he  becomes  a sãdhu,  the  fascination  that  he  had 
previously  developed,  subsides;  but  the  house  he  left  behind  would 
be in ruins.  Then, like the dog of a washer-man, who is fed neither at 
home  nor  at  the  river,  he  falls  from  both  paths.    On  the  other  hand, 
those who have firm vairãgya, attain Akshardhãm.” 
 
7.9
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  another  question  to  the paramhans,  in 
an extremely pleased mood:  “What is ãtyantik kalyãn?    Also,  how 
does a person who has attained ãtyantik kalyãn and siddh-dashã, feel 
in all of his activities?” 
 
7.10
 The munis answered  according  to  their  understanding,  but  Shreeji 
Mahãrãj’s question was not answered  adequately.    So,  all  the munis 
folded their hands and said to Shreeji Mahãrãj, “Mahãrãj, you will 
have to answer that question.” 
 
7.11
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “During the destruction of the brahmãnd, 
the   twenty-four tattvas,   which   have   evolved from Prakruti,   are 
absorbed  into Prakruti.    Then, Prakruti-Purush also  disappear  in  the 
divine light of Akshar-Brahm, after which only the concentrated light, 
which  is sachidãnand,  remains.    The divya murti of Purushottam 
Bhagvãn Vãsudev is  constantly  present  in  that  divine  light.    Through 
that divya murti,   He   Himself   becomes   visible   to   everyone,   and 
incarnates on earth in human form for the purpose of granting kalyãn 
to the jeevs.  But, the jeevs on earth who are ignorant fools, claim that 
Bhagvãn has mãyik qualities within Him.  In reality, he does not have 
any mãyik qualities within Him; He is forever gunãtit and has a divya 
murti.  Moreover, it is that very same Bhagvãn, who has a murti and is 
divya,    which    the    Vedãnt shãstras propound as    being nirgun, 
achhedhya, abhedhya,   and   pervading   everywhere.      He   has   been 
described  as  being nirgun,  in  order  to  dismiss  the mãyik view  from 
the mind of the jeev.  That Bhagvãn remains the same during the time 
of creation, sustenance, and destruction of the universe; He does not 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 290 - 
undergo   any   changes   like   worldly   objects   do,   and   He   always 
maintains  a divya svarup.    Having  such  a  firm  belief  of pratyaksha 
Purushottam, is called ãtyantik kalyãn. 
 
7.12
 “A  person  who  has  attained siddh-dashã through   such   belief, 
experiences  the  following:    Wherever  he  casts  his  eyes – among  all 
the sthãvar and jangam forms – he sees the murti of Bhagvãn as if it is 
before    his    eyes,    the    same murti that    constantly    remains    in 
Akshardhãm even  after  the  destruction  of  the  body,  the brahmãnd 
and Prakruti-Purush.    Other  than  that murti,  he  does  not  perceive 
even  an  atom.    These  are  the  characteristics  of  a  person  who  has 
attained siddh-dashã.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Kãriyãni || 7 || 103 || 
 
 
Kãriyãni – 8 
Sagun And Nirgun  
 
8.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Kãrtik  sud 4  [9
th
 November,  1820], 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on  the  veranda 
outside the north-facing rooms of Vastã Khãchar’s darbãr in Kãriyãni.  
He was dressed entirely in white clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
8.2
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked a question:  “Mahãrãj, the Veds, the 
shãstras,  the  Purãns,  and  the  historical shãstras,  have  described  the 
sagun svarup of Bhagvãn and  have  also  described His nirgun svarup.  
So,  how  should  a  person  understand  the nirgun svarup,  and  how 
should he understand the sagun svarup of Shree Purushottam?  Also, 
how  much  does  a bhakta of Bhagvãn benefit  by  understanding  the 
nirgun svarup of  that Bhagvãn,  and  how  much does  he  benefit  by 
understanding the sagun svarup of that Bhagvãn?” 
 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 291 - 
8.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The nirgun svarup of Bhagvãn is  much 
subtler than that which is subtle.  It is the ãtmã of all the tattvas, such 
as pruthvi and jal; it is the ãtmã of Pradhãn-Purush, which are higher 
than  those tattvas;  and  it  is  the ãtmã of  pure Purush and Prakruti 
which  are  themselves  higher  than Pradhãn-Purush;  it  is  the ãtmã of 
even Akshar who is higher than them.  All these make up the sharir of 
Bhagvãn.  Just as the jeev is subtler, purer, and of greater luminosity 
than  the  body,  in  the  same  way,  compared  to  all  the  other  entities, 
Bhagvãn is  much  more  subtle,  pure,  unaffected,  and  luminous.    For 
example, ãkãsh pervades   the   four bhuts (pruthvi, jal, tej   vãyu).  
Moreover,   it   remains   unaffected   by   those   four bhuts,   and   the 
influences  of  those  four bhuts do  not  affect ãkãsh.    In  fact,  despite 
dwelling in those four bhuts, ãkãsh remains absolutely unaffected.  In 
the  same  way, Purushottam Bhagvãn dwells  in  all  as  their ãtmã.  
Despite  this,  He  is  absolutely  unchanged  and  untainted,  and  He 
maintains   His   own   unique   characteristics;   no   one   is   capable   of 
becoming like Him.  
 
8.4
 “For example, even though ãkãsh dwells  within  the  four bhuts,  the 
four bhuts are  incapable  of  becoming  unaffected  and  untainted  like 
ãkãsh.  Similarly, Purushottam Bhagvãn is the ãtmã of all, yet no one 
up  to  and  including Akshar is  capable  of  becoming  as  powerful  as 
Purushottam Bhagvãn.  In this way, being extremely subtle, extremely 
unaffected,     extremely     pure,     extremely     untainted,     extremely 
luminous,  and  possessing  tremendous,  divine  powers  is  the nirgun 
aspect  of  the murti of  that Bhagvãn.    In  another  example,  if  Mount 
Girnãr  were  to  be  placed  next  to  Mount  Lokã-Lok  it  would  appear 
extremely    small.        In   the   same    way,    before   the    vastness   of 
Purushottam Bhagvãn,  countless  millions  of brahmãnds,  which  are 
encircled by the eight barriers (jad prakruti), appear extremely small, 
like  mere  atoms.    Those brahmãnds do  not  become  smaller,  but 
before the vastness of Bhagvãn they appear smaller.  In this way, the 
extreme  vastness  of  the murti of Bhagvãn is  the sagun aspect  of 
Bhagvãn. 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 292 - 
8.5
 “Then, someone may doubt, ‘In His nirgun svarup, Bhagvãn is subtler 
than  the  extremely  subtle,  and  in  His  sagun  svarup,  He  is  more  vast 
than the extremely vast.  Then, what is the nature of the original svarup 
of Bhagvãn, who assumes both of these svarups?’ 
 
8.6
 “Then, answer to that is that the pratyaksha svarup of Bhagvãn visible 
in a human svarup is the eternal and original svarup of Bhagvãn.  His 
nirgun and sagun aspects  are  the  special,  divine  powers  of  that 
svarup.    For  example, Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn and  Arjun  sat  in  a 
chariot  and  went  to  retrieve  the  son  of  the brãhman.    After  crossing 
Mount  Lokã-Lok,  they  reached  the  darkness  of Mãyã.   Shree  Krishna 
pierced  that Mãyã using  his sudarshan chakra.    Then,  reaching  the 
light of Brahm, which is beyond that Mãyã, he retrieved the son of the 
brãhman from  Bhumã-Purush  who  resides  there.   In  that  situation, 
the   chariot   and   horses   were mãyik and   physical,   but   through 
contact with Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn,  they  became  extremely  subtle 
and chaitanya;  so,  they  reached  the nirgun Akshardhãm of Bhagvãn.  
In this way, to impart subtlety to physical objects is the nirgun aspect 
of Shree Krishna Bhagvãn’s murti. 
 
8.7
 “Furthermore, that same Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn showed  the  whole 
brahmãnd,  including  the  eight  barriers  (jad  prakruti)  which  encircle 
it,  in  his  own  mouth  to  his  mother,  Yashodãji.    To  Arjun, he  also 
revealed the Vishvarup form in his own svarup.  At the time, with the 
exception of Arjun, everyone saw the svarup of Bhagvãn as being five-
and-a-half feet in height.  Also, when Bhagvãn assumed the avatãr of 
Vãman,  he  initially  gave darshan in  the  form  of  a  dwarf.    However, 
after  he  had  made  Bali  give  up  as  much  land  as  could  be  covered  in 
three  footsteps,  he  increased  the  size  of  his  own svarup to  such  an 
extent that one footstep alone covered the seven Pãtãls, with his own 
body  covering  the  entire  sky.    With  his  second  footstep,  he  covered 
the  seven  Svargs  and  pierced  the  outer  shell  of  the brahmãnd.    Bali 
Rãjã  saw  this  vast svarup of Bhagvãn,  but others only  saw  the  dwarf 
svarup of Bhagvãn. 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 293 - 
8.8
 “In this way, Bhagvãn’s vastness,  which  is  even  more  vast  than  the 
extremely vast, is the sagun aspect of Bhagvãn’s murti.  For example, 
the   sky   is   cloudless   during   the   winter   and   summer,   but   when 
monsoon  arrives,  it  becomes  overcast  with  innumerable  clusters  of 
clouds.    With  time,  these  clouds  form in  the  sky  and  later  disperse 
again.  In the same way, by His own will, Bhagvãn reveals His divine 
powers  from  Himself  in  their nirgun and sagun aspects,  and  also 
withdraws  them  back  within  Himself.    That Bhagvãn appears  to  be 
like  a  human,  but  no  one  is  able  to  understand  the  limits  of  His 
greatness.    If  a bhakta realises  the nirgun and sagun aspects  in 
Bhagvãn’s svarup in  this  way,  then Kãl, karma,  and Mãyã would  be 
incapable   of   binding   him,   and   throughout   the   day   he   would 
continuously experience wonder in his heart.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Kãriyãni || 8 || 104 || 
 
 
Kãriyãni – 9 
As Stubborn As A Buffalo 
 
9.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Kãrtik  sud 5  [10
th
 November,  1820], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  north-facing  rooms  of  Vastã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Kãriyãni.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from various places, 
had gathered before Him.  
 
9.2
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  a  question  to  Nityãnand Swãmi  and 
Brahmãnand Swãmi:  “Suppose there is someone who is so unkind 
and stubborn, that once he develops a grudge for someone, he never 
abandons that grudge.  Instead, he continues to remain stubborn like 
a buffalo.  Can such a person be called a sãdhu or not?” 
 
9.3
 Both replied, “A person who is like that cannot be called a sãdhu.” 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 294 - 
9.4
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked a question:  “Mahãrãj, there may be a 
bhakta of Bhagvãn who  perceives avgun in  some  other bhakta,  and 
due to that, he develops hatred for that bhakta.  How can he eradicate 
the perception of that avgun?” 
 
9.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A person who has the bhakti of Bhagvãn in 
his   heart   and   realises   the   greatness   of Bhagvãn,   would   never 
perceive avgun in  a bhakta of Bhagvãn,  and he  would  never  develop 
an unkind stubbornness towards a bhakta of Bhagvãn.  For example, 
Uddhavji  had  understood  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn,  and  therefore 
asked  for  a vardãn:   ‘May I be reborn as any of the vines, or blades of 
grass,  or  shrubs  in  Vrundãvan  in  order  to  have the  privilege  of  being 
touched by the dust of the feet of the gopis’.  Also, Shree  Krishna 
Bhagvãn told Baldevji that the trees, birds, and deer in Vrundãvan are 
extremely  fortunate.    Even Brahmã asked  for  a vardãn from Shree 
Krishna Bhagvãn:  ‘O Bhagvãn!  May I be so highly blessed to be able to 
serve  your  holy  feet  as    your  dãs,  either  in  this  life,  or  in  the  life  of  an 
animal or bird’. 
 
9.6
 “Therefore, a person who understands the greatness of a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn in  this  way  will  never  develop  a  grudge  due to a person’s 
avgun.    Moreover,  a  person  who  understands  such  greatness  never 
takes  into  account  even  minor avgun that  are  present  in  a bhakta of 
the pratyaksha svarup his  own ishta-dev.    In  fact,  a  person  who 
realises the greatness of Bhagvãn looks upon even animals, trees, and 
shrubs, which have come into contact with Bhagvãn, as equivalent to 
devs.  If that is so, what can be said of those people who are engaged 
in  the bhakti of Bhagvãn,  abiding  by  the vartmãn,  and  chanting  the 
name of Bhagvãn?  He would certainly look upon them as equivalent 
to devs and would not think unkindly of them. 
 
9.7
 “Therefore, a person who understands the greatness of Bhagvãn does 
not develop hatred towards bhaktas of Bhagvãn.  On the other hand, 
a  person  who  does  not  understand  such  greatness  does  develop 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 295 - 
hatred  towards  them.    Therefore,  a  person  who  does  not  realise  the 
greatness of Bhagvãn and His bhakta should be known as being half-
fallen,  even  if  he  is  a satsangi.    Only a  person  who  understands  the 
greatness  of Bhagvãn and  the bhaktas of Bhagvãn should  be  known 
to be a perfect satsangi.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Kãriyãni || 9 || 105 || 
 
 
Kãriyãni – 10 
Checking The Pulse 
A Sãdhu Can Only Please Bhagvãn By Performing Tap 
 
10.1
 In   the Samvat year   1877,   on   the   night   of Kãrtik   sud 10   [15
th
 
November,  1820],  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  in 
one of the east-facing rooms of Vastã Khãchar’s darbãr in Kãriyãni.  A 
sabhã of ten or twelve senior sãdhus and five or six haribhaktas were 
sitting before Him.  Shreeji Mahãrãj seemed to have a fever, and so he 
was  warming  Himself  in  front  of  a  coal  stove  that  had  been  placed 
before Him. 
 
10.2
 Then, Shreeji  Mahãrãj  told  Muktãnand  Swãmi, “Please  check my 
pulse.  It seems as if there is a slight illness in my body.” 
 
10.3
 Then, after checking His pulse, Muktãnand Swãmi said, “Mahãrãj!  It 
seems to be a serious illness.”  Saying this, he continued, “Mahãrãj, it 
seems that the times are tough for the satsangis right now.  After all, 
Mahãrãj, you are as vital to the satsangis as their lives, and any illness 
in   your   body   is   the   very   meaning   of   a   difficult   period   for   all 
satsangis.” 
 
10.4
 Hearing  this,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “In  order  to  please Bhagvãn, 
Nãradji performed severe tap by enduring cold and heat, hunger and 
thirst, for many yugs; and due to this, he was able to please Bhagvãn.  
In  the  same  way,  a  person  who  is  wise  deliberately  performs tap by 
restraining  his  body  and indriyas.    Therefore,  a sãdhu who  is  wise 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 296 - 
should also behave so as to deliberately induce suffering to his body 
and indriyas.    If  that  is  so,  why  should  he  wish  to  relieve  whatever 
suffering comes his way due to Bhagvãn’s wish? 
 
10.5
 “Moreover, a tyãgi sãdhu should  firmly  maintain  the  following  wish 
in his mind:  ‘I do not desire the pleasures of the panch-vishays found in 
Dev-Lok, Brahm-Lok, Vaikunth, and other loks.  In this very body, or by 
going  to  Badrikãshram  and  Shvet-Dvip  after  I  die,  I  wish  to  please 
Bhagvãn  by  performing  tap.    Furthermore,  even  if  it  takes  one  life  or 
two   lives   or   a   thousand   lives,   I   wish   to   please   Bhagvãn   only   by 
performing tap’. 
 
10.6
 “Furthermore, the jeev’s kalyãn is  attained  only  by  the  following 
understanding:   ‘Everything happens by the will of Shree Krishna-
Nãrãyan, not by Kãl, karma, or Mãyã’.  In this way, understanding that 
only Bhagvãn is the all-doer, is the best cause of kalyãn.  Performing 
tap,  however,  earns Bhagvãn’s pleasure.    Yet  even  while  performing 
tap,  a  person  should  keep  such  feelings  as Rãdhikãji and Lakshmiji 
keep  for Bhagvãn when  offering  loving bhakti.    If  a  person  still 
understands only Bhagvãn to be the all-doer, then even if he does not 
perform tap, his jeev overcomes the misery of births and deaths.  But, 
without  performing tap, Bhagvãn’s pleasure  is  not  bestowed  upon 
that jeev. 
 
10.7
 “There is no sinner worse than the person who does not realise 
Bhagvãn to be the all-doer.  In fact, he should be known to be a sinner 
worse   than   a   person   who   has   killed   a   cow,   killed   a brãhman, 
associated with the wife of his own guru, or criticised a sadguru who 
is  a  knower  of brahm.    This  is  because  he  believes Kãl, karma,  and 
Mãyã,  to  be  the  cause  of  everything;  not Bhagvãn.    In  fact,  a  person 
should not even stand in the shadow of such persons who are nãstik 
outcasts, nor should he listen to their talks, even unknowingly. 
 
10.8
 “Furthermore, by the grace of Bhagvãn,  those  who  are bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn may  become  like Brahmã, Shiv,  Shukji,  or Nãrad;  they  may 
even become like Prakruti-Purush; or they may become like brahm or 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 297 - 
Akshar.      However,   no   one   is   capable   of   becoming   like Shree 
Purushottam-Nãrãyan.  Therefore, just like a vile person is shunned, a 
person  should  immediately  shun  the  company  of  those  persons  and 
those shãstras that  disprove  the upãsanã of Bhagvãn and  break  his 
master-servant relationship with Bhagvãn.” 
 
10.9
 Then,  Muktãnand  Swãmi  asked,  “Mahãrãj,  a bhakta who   serves 
Bhagvãn by offering beautiful clothes, jewellery, and various types of 
food,  also  desires  to  please Bhagvãn.    Yet,  you  are  saying  that  a 
person   can   only   please Bhagvãn through tap.      Then,   what   is 
inappropriate   about   pleasing Bhagvãn through   such   offerings, 
without restoring to tap?” 
 
10.10
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If the person who is offering bhakti to 
Bhagvãn with such lavish objects does so without any desires, solely 
for the purpose of earning Bhagvãn’s pleasure, then it is all right.  On 
the other hand, if he is tempted by those objects, viewing them to be 
Bhagvãn’s prasãd, and leaving Bhagvãn aside, if he develops affection 
for  those  objects,  then  by  indulging  in  the vishays,  he  will  become 
engrossed   in   them   and   corrupted   by   them – that   is   what   is 
inappropriate.    Therefore,  a tyãgi should  realise Bhagvãn to  be  the 
all-doer  and  strive  to  please Bhagvãn only by  performing tap.    He 
should  also  worship Bhagvãn by  offering  loving bhakti in  the  same 
way as Rãdhikãji and Lakshmiji.  That is my principle.” 
 
10.11
 Then, Brahmãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, please tell us how we can 
benefit in this lok and in the lok we attain after death?” 
 
10.12
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The principle that I have just explained is 
itself the only means to attain supreme bliss, in this lok and in other 
loks.” 
 
10.13
 Then, Gopalãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, in a person’s mind, he may 
have great  enthusiasm  to  develop  the  qualities of tyãg and  perform 
tap.  But, if some obstacle is encountered in the process, what should 
he do?” 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 298 - 
10.14
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A person who has great dedication in any 
activity would never be held back, even if he were to face thousands 
of obstacles.  That should be known to be true dedication.  Just see, it 
has   been   twenty-one   years   since   I   first   met   Rãmãnand   Swãmi.  
During  this  period,  I  have  come  across  countless bhaktas who  have 
been   offering   countless  varieties  of   clothes,   jewellery,   food,   and 
drink.  Despite this, my mind has never been tempted by any of those 
objects.  This is because I have dedication only for tyãg. 
 
10.15
 “Furthermore,  in  this  world  there  are  so  many  widows  who, 
following  the  death  of  their  husbands,  continue  to  grieve.    On  the 
other hand, there are also many women who renounce their wedded 
husbands and engage themselves in worshipping Bhagvãn.  Similarly, 
there  are  so  many  foolish  men  who  mourn  the  loss  of  their  own 
wives  and  continues  to  have  desires  for  other  women.    However, 
there  are  so  many  men  with vairãgya,  who  renounce  their  own 
wedded  wives  and  engage  themselves  in  worshipping Bhagvãn.    In 
this way, each and every person has a different type of dedication. 
 
10.16
 “But, my dedication and principle is just this:  A person should strive 
to  please Bhagvãn by  performing tap.    Also,  realising Bhagvãn to  be 
the  all-doer,  he  should  offer bhakti to  Him  while  maintaining  a 
master-servant  relationship,  and he should  not  allow  the upãsanã of 
that Bhagvãn to  be  violated  in  any  way.    All  of  you  should  accept 
these words of mine as the most supreme principle.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Kãriyãni || 10 || 106 || 
 
 
Kãriyãni – 11 
The Characteristics Of Love 
 
11.1
 In   the Samvat year   1877,   on   the   night   of Kãrtik   sud 11   [16
th
 
November, 1820], Shreeji Mahãrãj was sitting on the veranda outside 
the east-facing rooms of Vastã Khãchar’s darbãr in Kãriyãni.  He was 
wearing  a  white khes and  a  white dagli made  of chhint.    He  had  also 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 299 - 
tied  a  white pãgh around  His  head,  and  was  wearing  garlands  of 
yellow  and  red guldãvadi flowers.    Tassels  of  yellow  flowers  were 
also  dangling  from  His pãgh.    In  addition  to  this,  two  barbers  who 
were  holding  torches,  were  standing  before  Him  on  either  side.    A 
sabhã of munis,  as  well as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had 
gathered before Him. 
 
11.2
 Then,  Sachidãnand  Swãmi  asked Shreeji  Mahãrãj,  “What  are  the 
characteristics of a person who has love of Bhagvãn?” 
 
11.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A person who has love for his beloved 
Bhagvãn,  will  never  disobey  the  wishes  of  his  beloved.    That  is  that 
characteristic  of  love.    To  take  an  example,  the gopis had  love  for 
Shree Krishna Bhagvãn.  So, when Shree Krishna Bhagvãn prepared to 
leave  for  Mathurã,  all  of  them  together  decided, ‘We will  disobey  the 
norms of family traditions and society, and we will keep Bhagvãn here 
by force’.  However, at the time of Shree Krishna Bhagvãn’s departure, 
they looked into his eyes and realised that it was not his wish to stay.  
As  a  result,  all  of  them  remained  far  away,  because  in  their  hearts, 
they  feared, ‘If we do not act according to Bhagvãn’s wishes, His love 
for us will subside’.  Thinking  in  this  way,  none  of  them  were  able  to 
utter a word. 
 
11.4
 “Then, after Bhagvãn went  to  Mathurã,  even  though Shree  Krishna 
was  only  five  miles  away,  the gopis never  disobeyed  his  wishes  by 
going for his darshan.  They realised, ‘If we do go to Mathurã against 
Bhagvãn’s wish, then the love that Bhagvãn has for us will diminish’. 
 
11.5
 “Therefore, the characteristic of love is exactly this:  A person who 
has true love for someone acts according to that person’s wishes.  If 
he  realises  his  beloved  to  be  pleased  by  his  staying  nearby,  then  he 
stays  nearby.    On  the  other  hand,  if  he  realises  his  beloved  to  be 
pleased by his staying away, then he stays away; but in no way does 
he behave contrary to his beloved’s wish.  That is the characteristic of 
love.  So, since the gopis had true love for Bhagvãn, they did not go for 
Bhagvãn’s darshan without  his ãgnã.    Only  when Bhagvãn sent  for 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 300 - 
them  in  Kurukshetra  did  they  have darshan of Bhagvãn,  but  in  no 
way  did  they  disobey Bhagvãn’s ãgnã.    Therefore,  a  person  who  has 
love  for Bhagvãn would  never  disobey Bhagvãn’s ãgnã.    He  would 
only  act  according to Bhagvãn’s wishes.   That is  the  characteristic  of 
love.” 
 
11.6
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Now let me ask a question.” 
 
11.7
 The munis responded, “Mahãrãj, please do ask.” 
 
11.8
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Except for those panch-vishays which are 
related  to Bhagvãn,  a bhakta of Bhagvãn treats  all  other vishays as 
worthless.      Therefore,   he   associates   only   with Bhagvãn.      Now, 
suppose Bhagvãn were to issue the following ãgnã to such a bhakta:  
‘Live away from me’.  In that situation, if he keeps a selfish desire for 
Bhagvãn’s darshan, it would amount to disobeying the ãgnã; and if he 
does  not  follow  the ãgnã,  then  the  love  that Bhagvãn has  towards 
that bhakta would  not  remain.    Therefore,  just  as  that bhakta has 
abandoned  the  worldly vishays (shabda,  sparsh,  rup,  ras,  and  gandh), 
does he also abandon the vishays related to Bhagvãn, or does he not?  
That is the question.” 
 
11.9
 Each   of   the munis gave   an   answer   according   to   his   level   of 
intelligence, but the question was not answered satisfactorily.  Then, 
they said to Shreeji Mahãrãj, “Mahãrãj, you will have to provide the 
answer.” 
11.10
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If a bhakta has deep love for Bhagvãn, 
treats  the  worldly panch-vishays that  are  not  related  to Bhagvãn as 
worthless,  and  if  he is  firmly  attached  to Bhagvãn via  the panch-
vishays,  then  wherever  such  a bhakta goes  by Bhagvãn’s ãgnã,  the 
murti of Bhagvãn also  goes  with  him.    Moreover,  just  as  that bhakta 
cannot  remain  without Bhagvãn,  in  exactly  the  same  way, Bhagvãn 
also cannot remain without the bhakta.  In fact, He does not leave the 
heart of the bhakta even for a fraction of a second.  Therefore, such a 
bhakta does constantly maintain contact with Bhagvãn in the panch-

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 301 - 
vishays.  This is because the same panch-vishays that no one can stay 
without, that bhakta has considered to be worthless.  Instead, he has 
attached  himself  to Bhagvãn in  the panch-vishays.    Therefore,  that 
bhakta maintains a constant relationship with Bhagvãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Kãriyãni || 11 || 107 || 
 
 
Kãriyãni – 12 
Destroying The Kãran Body 
 
12.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Kãrtik  sud  Punam [20
th
 November, 
1820], Swãmi Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  east-facing  rooms  of  Vastã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Kãriyãni.    He  was  wearing  a  white khes and  a 
white dagli made  of chhint.    He  has  also  tied  a  white feto with  a 
bokãni around   His   head.      A sabhã of paramhans,   as   well   as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
12.2
 Then,    Shreeji Mahãrãj  said,  “Please  begin  a  question-answer 
discussion.” 
 
12.3
 Then, the munis asked questions amongst themselves for quite some 
time,  where  the  topic  of  the  three  bodies  of  the jeev (sthul, sukshma, 
and kãran)   and   the   three   bodies   of ishvar (virãt, sutrãtmã and 
avyãkrut) arose. 
 
12.4
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then commented, “The kãran body is the mãyã of the 
jeev.    That  same kãran body  evolves  into  the sthul and sukshma 
bodies.    Therefore,  all  three  bodies –sthul, sukshma,  and kãran – can 
be  said  to  be  the mãyã of  the jeev.    In  the  same  way, virãt, sutrãtmã, 
and avyãkrut can be said to be the mãyã of ishvar. 
 
12.5
 “The kãran body,  the mãyã of  the jeev,  is  attached  so  strongly  to  the 
jeev that   they   cannot   be   separated   by   any   means   whatsoever.  
However,  if  a  person  attains  the  company  of  a sant,  realises  the 
svarup of Bhagvãn through the words of that sant, performs dhyãn on 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 302 - 
the svarup of Bhagvãn, and  takes  in  the  words  of Bhagvãn in  his 
heart, then the kãran body attached to his jeev is burnt completely. 
 
12.6
 “For example, the shell of a tamarind seed is firmly attached to the 
seed.  But, when the seed is roasted over a fire, the shell is burnt and 
then  becomes  detached.    It  can  then  be  peeled  off  easily  by  rubbing 
the  seed  in  your  hands.    Similarly,  when  the kãran body is ‘roasted’ 
by performing dhyãn and following the words of Bhagvãn, it becomes 
separated  from  the jeev just  as  easily  as  when  a  person  rubs  off  the 
shell of a roasted tamarind seed.  However, even if a person were to 
try a million other methods, he would not be able to destroy the jeev’s 
ignorance in the form of the kãran body.”  
 
12.7
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  a  question  to  the munis:  “During the 
jãgrat state, sattva-gun prevails  and  a  person  has  knowledge  of  all 
objects.  In spite of this, when a person hears something in the jãgrat 
state,  it  can  only  be  strengthened  if  he  thinks  of  it  in  the sukshma 
body.    However rajo-gun prevails  in  the sukshma body;  and  during 
the  state  of rajo-gun,  complete  knowledge  is  not  possible.    However, 
in the sukshma body, when a person thinks about what he has heard 
during  the jãgrat state,  it  becomes  complete  knowledge.    How  can 
this apparent contradiction be resolved?” 
 
12.8
 The munis collectively  attempted  to  explain  to  the  best  of  their 
understanding,   but   none   could   provide   an   adequate   answer   to 
Shreeji Mahãrãj’s question.  Therefore, they folded their hands and 
said, “Mahãrãj, this question can only be answered by you.” 
 
12.9
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj thereupon explained, “The answer is that the jeev, 
which  is  the kshetragna,  dwells  within  the  heart.    The kshetragna 
enlightens  the  fourteen indriyas.    Of  these indriyas,  the antah-karans 
dwell  extremely  close  to  the kshetragna.    As  a  result,  whatever a 
person  hears  is  consolidated  when  he  thinks  about  it  in  the antah-
karans.    After  all,  the kshetragna is  more  powerful  than  all  the 
indriyas and the antah-karans, and so whatever it approves becomes 
thoroughly strengthened.” 

KÃRIYÃNI 
- 303 - 
12.10
 Having heard this answer, the munis commented, “Mahãrãj, you have 
given  a  precise  answer.    No  one  besides  you  could  have  answered 
that question.” 
 
12.11
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Regardless of how lustful, angry, greedy, 
or rude a person may be, if he listens to these types of talks with faith 
and love, all of his vicious natures would be eradicated.  For example, 
if a man with teeth strong enough to chew raw chick-peas were to eat 
many  sour  mangoes,  he  then  would  not  be  able  to  chew  even  boiled 
rice.    In  that  same  way,  if  a  person,  who  is  strongly  overpowered  by 
vicious natures were to listen to these talks with shraddhã, then that 
person would no longer be capable of indulging in the panch-vishays.  
Moreover, the mind does not become as free of desires for vishays by 
subjecting    the    body    to    strict vrats such    as tapta-kruchhra, 
chãndrãyan,  as  it  does  by  listening  to  these  talks  of Bhagvãn.    In 
addition,   your   minds   must   not   become   stable   while   performing 
dhyãn or  by  turning  a mãlã as  perfectly  as  they  do  while  you  are 
listening to these talks.  Therefore, a person should listen to the talks 
of Purushottam-Nãrãyan with  faith  and  love.    There  is  no  better 
method to stabilise the mind and to free it of the desires for vishays.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Kãriyãni || 12 || 108 || 
 
 
|| End of Shree Kãriyãni Prakaran ||

LOYÃ 
- 304 - 
|| SHREE SWÃMINÃRAYAN VIJAYTETRÃM || 
 
VACHANÃMRUT 
Shree Loyã Prakaran 
 
Loyã – 1 
Anger 
Developing Complete Satsang 
 
1.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Kãrtik  vad 10  [30
th
 November,  1820], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated 
bedstead  in  the  residential  hall  of  the paramhans in Surã Khãchar’s 
darbãr in Loyã.  He was wearing a white, cotton-padded survãl and a 
white dagli made of chhint.  He had also tied a white feto around His 
head.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places, 
had gathered before Him. 
 
1.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked the munis, “What does ‘Shankar’ mean?” 
 
1.3
 The munis replied, “That which gives bliss is called Shankar.” 
 
1.4
 Hearing this answer, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Last night, an hour or two 
before  sunrise, Shivji granted  me  his darshan in  a  dream.    He  was 
seated  on  the  big,  powerful Nandishvar.    His  body  was  of  a  large 
build,    and    he    had    thick,    matted    hair;    he    appeared    to    be 
approximately forty years of age.  Along with Shivji was Pãrvati, who 
was  wearing  all  white  clothes.   Shivji,  like  a  great sãdhu,  appeared 
tranquil,  and  he  showed  great  love  towards  me.    However,  I  did  not 
feel love for him.  This is because I believe, ‘Shiv is a dev that is full of 
tamo-gun,   whereas   I   worship   Shree   Krishna-Nãrãyan   who   is   the 
incarnation of tranquillity’.  Therefore,  I  do  not  have  much  love  for 
devs like Brahmã, Shiv,  and Indra,  who  have rajo-gun and tamo-gun.  
Moreover, I have much hatred towards anger; I do not like angry men 
or angry devs.  Nonetheless, why do I respect Shivji?  I do so because 
he is a tyãgi, a yogi, and a great bhakta of Bhagvãn. 

LOYÃ 
- 305 - 
1.5
 “What is anger like?  Well, it is like a rabid dog.  If the saliva of a rabid 
dog touches a man or an animal, then they suffer and die, just like the 
constantly barking rabid dog.  Similarly, a person infected by saliva in 
the form of anger, suffers like a rabid dog, and falls from the path of a 
sãdhu. 
 
1.6
 “Furthermore, just like a butcher, an Arab, a cruel soldier, a tiger, a 
leopard, and a black snake frighten everyone and kill some, similarly, 
anger frightens all and takes the life of some.  If such anger arises in a 
sãdhu,  it  appears  very  unsuitable;  after  all,  a sãdhu should  be  calm.  
But,  if  anger  were  to  arise,  that sãdhu would  appear  cruel  to  others.  
At  that  time,  the sãdhu’s appearance  would change  since anger  itself 
is ugly.  Therefore, anger makes a person appear ugly.” 
 
1.7
 Then, Shuk Muni asked, “Mahãrãj, if a slight trace of anger arises but 
is then suppressed, is such anger disruptive, or not?” 
 
1.8
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If a snake were to appear in this sabhã at 
this  moment,  then  even  if it  does  not  bite  anyone,  everyone  would 
still have to rise and scatter; there would be panic in everyone’s 
heart.  Furthermore, if a tiger were to come and roar at the outskirts 
of  the  village,  then  even  if  it  does  not  harm  anyone,  all  would  feel 
terror within, and no one would come out of their homes.  Similarly, 
even  if  a  trace  of  anger  were  to  arise,  it  would  still  be  a  source  of 
extreme misery.” 
 
1.9
 Then, Nãnã Nirmanãnand Swãmi asked, “By what means can kãm be 
totally uprooted?” 
 
1.10
 To  this,  Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Kãm is  uprooted  if  a  person  has 
extremely  firmly  realised  himself  to  be  the ãtmã;  and  he  firmly 
follows  the panch-vartmãn,  including  the  vow  of  the  eight  types  of 
brahm-chãrya;   and   he   thoroughly   understands   the   greatness   of 
Bhagvãn.  However, even after the roots of kãm have been eradicated, 

LOYÃ 
- 306 - 
a  person  should  not deviate  from brahm-chãrya and  other niyams in 
any ways.  However, the method for totally uprooting even the most 
vicious form of kãm is to fully understand the greatness of Bhagvãn.” 
 
1.11
 Then,  Bhajanãnand  Swãmi  asked,  “Mahãrãj,  what  are  the 
characteristics  of  the  three  levels  of vairãgya – kanishth, madhyam, 
and uttam?” 
 
1.12
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A person with the kanishth vairãgya is pure 
while  strictly  following  the niyams related  to  the tyãg of  women  as 
described  in  the  Dharma-Shãstras.  But, if he were to see a women’s 
body,  then  his  would  get  attached  to  that  body,  and  he  would  not 
remain stable.  Such a person can be considered to be a person with 
the kanishth vairãgya. 
 
1.13
 “If a person with a madhyam vairãgya were  to  see  a  naked  women, 
no  disturbance  would  arise  in  his  mind,  just  as  he  would  not  be 
disturbed  by  seeing  naked  animals.    Moreover,  his  mind  would  not 
become attached to that woman.  Such a person can be considered to 
be a person with the madhyam vairãgya. 
 
1.14
 “Now, if a person with the uttam vairãgya were  to  come  across 
women  and  other  worldly  objects,  even in  solitude,  he  would  not  be 
tempted.    Such  a  person  can  be  considered  to  be  a  person  with  the 
uttam vairãgya.” 
 
1.15
 Then, Bhajanãnand Swãmi asked again, “What are the characteristics 
for  the  three  levels  of Bhagvãn’s gnãn – kanishth, madhyam,  and 
uttam?” 
 
1.16
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A person with the kanishth gnãn initially 
develops the nishchay in Bhagvãn upon seeing His powers.  However, 
when such powers are not seen in Him, or when nothing unpleasant 
happens  to  an  evil  person  who  slanders Bhagvãn,  then  his nishchay 

LOYÃ 
- 307 - 
would  not  remain.    Such  a  person  can  be  described  to  be  a  person 
with the kanishth gnãn. 
 
1.17
 “If a person with a madhyam gnãn were  to  see  pure  and  impure 
human  actions  of Bhagvãn,  he  would  be  deceived  by  them,  and  his 
nishchay in Bhagvãn would  not  remain.    Such  a  person  can  be 
described to be a person with the madhyam gnãn. 
 
1.18
 “A person  with  the uttam gnãn,  would  not  be  deceived  even  after 
seeing  any  type  of  pure  or  impure  actions  performed  by Bhagvãn, 
and  his nishchay would  not  diminish.    Moreover,  even  if  the  person 
who  initially  convinced  him  of Bhagvãn were  to  say, ‘He  is  not 
Bhagvãn’, he would feel, ‘This person must be mad’.  Such a person can 
be described to be a person with the uttam gnãn. 
 
1.19
 “Of these, the person with the kanishth gnãn becomes siddh after 
countless lives; the person with a madhyam gnãn becomes siddh after 
two  or  three  lives;  and  the  person  with  the uttam gnãn becomes 
siddh in the same life.”  Shreeji Mahãrãj replied in this way. 
 
1.20
 Then,  Motã  Shivãnand  Swãmi  asked,  “Despite  having  complete 
nishchay in Bhagvãn, why does a person not feel fulfilled within?” 
 
1.21
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A person whose antah-karans burns due to 
enemies, such as of kãm, krodh, lobh, svãd, sneh, and mãn, would not 
believe  himself  to  be  fulfilled – even  if  he  does  have nishchay in 
Bhagvãn.” 
 
1.22
 Then,  Nityãnand  Swãmi asked, “What is the method for overcoming 
these enemies?” 
   
1.23
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The enemies are overcome only if a person 
remains  alert  to  harshly  punish  them.    Just  as Dharma-Rãj remains 
ready,  day  and  night,  to  beat  sinners  with  a  stick,  similarly,  if  the 

LOYÃ 
- 308 - 
indriyas behave immorally, then the indriyas should be punished; and 
if  the antah-karans behave  immorally,  then  the antah-karans should 
be  punished.    The indriyas should  be  punished  by  imposing  upon 
them the kruchhra chãndrãyan and other vrats, and the antah-karans 
should  be  punished  through  a  thought  process.    As  a  result,  those 
enemies,  like kãm and krodh,  would  be  defeated.    Then,  by  having 
nishchay in Bhagvãn,  a  person  would  feel  himself  to  be  completely 
fulfilled.” 
 
1.24
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Who can be said to have developed 
complete satsang?” 
 
1.25
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “First of all, such a person has extremely 
firmly  realised  himself  to  be  the ãtmã.    Also,  he  believes  his ãtmã to 
be  absolutely  detached  from  the  body,  the indriyas,  and  the antah-
karans; he does not believe the actions of the body and indriyas to be 
his  own.    Despite  this,  he  does  not  permit  even  a  slight  lapse  in 
following  the panch-vartmãn.    Moreover,  even  though  he  himself 
behaves   as brahm-svarup,   he   does   not   abandon   his   feeling   of 
servitude   towards Purushottam Bhagvãn;   he   faithfully   worships 
Bhagvãn while  maintaining  a  master-servant  relationship  with  Him.  
Furthermore,  he  realises  the pratyaksha murti of Bhagvãn to  be 
absolutely unaffected, like ãkãsh. 
 
1.26
  “That ãkãsh is  interwoven  with  and  pervades  the  other  four bhuts; 
and the actions of the other four bhuts occur within ãkãsh.  Similarly, 
despite  performing  pure  and  impure  actions,  the pratyaksha Shree 
Krishna-Nãrãyan remains  unaffected,  just  like ãkãsh.    Also,  such  a 
person realises the countless powers of this Bhagvãn as follows: ‘This 
Bhagvãn appears to be human for the kalyãn of the jeevs.  But, in fact, 
He is the creator, preserver, and destroyer of countless brahmãnds.  He 
is the lord of Golok, Vaikunth, Shvet-Dvip, Brahmpur, and other dhãms.  
He  is  also  the  lord  of  all  the  countless  akshar-rup muktas’.  With  this 
understanding   of Bhagvãn’s greatness,   he   devoutly   engages   in 

LOYÃ 
- 309 - 
various  forms  of bhakti,  and  in  listening  to  the  talks  of Bhagvãn.    He 
also  serves Bhagvãn’s bhaktas.    When  a  person  behaves  in  this  way, 
his satsang can be said to be complete.” 
 
1.27
 Nãnã Shivãnand Swãmi then asked, “At times, a person understands 
the  greatness  of  a bhakta of Bhagvãn extremely well,  but  at  other 
times, he does not understand it so well.  What is the reason for this?” 
 
1.28
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A sant follows  the  path  of dharma.  
When he sees a person treading the path of adharma, he lectures that 
person.    As  a  result,  a  person  who  identifies  himself  with  the  body 
will not know how to accept the advice positively and, in return, will 
perceive avgun in  the sant,  and  will  have  hatred  towards  the sant.  
Therefore, a person understands the greatness of a sant as long as he 
is  not  lectured  by  him.    Even  when  that  person  is  given  beneficial 
advice  that  may  pain  him,  he  perceives avgun in  the sant,  and  does 
not retain that understanding of the sant’s greatness. 
 
1.29
 “A person who perceives avgun in a sant, is unable to become pure by 
any  form  of prãyshchit.    In  fact,  release  from  the  sins, such  as  lust,  is 
possible,  but  release  from  the  sin  of  insulting  a sant is  not  possible.  
For  example,  if  a  person  contracts  tuberculosis,  no  medicine  would 
be  able  to  cure  the  disease;  he  would  definitely  die.    Similarly,  a 
person  who  perceives avgun in  a sant should  be  known  as  having 
tuberculosis;  he  will  certainly  fall  from satsang sometime  in  the 
future.    Furthermore,  even  if  a  person’s  hands,  feet,  nose,  eyes, 
fingers, and other body parts are severed, he still cannot be described 
as  dead.    However,  when  the  head  is  severed  from  the  body,  he  is 
described  as  dead.    Similarly,  a  person  who  perceives avgun in  a 
bhakta of Bhagvãn,   has   had   his   head   severed.      If   he   lapses   in 
following other vartmãn, then his limbs can be said to be severed – he 
will  still  live.    That  is,  he  will  survive  in satsang.    But,  a  person  who 
has  perceived avgun in  a sant will  certainly,  at  some  time,  fall  from 
satsang.  He should be known to have had his head severed.” 

LOYÃ 
- 310 - 
1.30
 Then, Bhagvadãnand Swãmi asked, “If a person has perceived avgun 
in a bhakta, is there any method to apologise for it, or not?” 
 
1.31
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “There is a solution, but it is extremely 
difficult;  a  person  who  has  intense shraddhã can  do  it.    When avgun 
are  perceived  in  a sant,  a  person  should  think, ‘I have committed a 
great  sin  by  perceiving  avgun  in  a  brahm-svarup  bhakta of Bhagvãn’.  
From  such  thoughts,  he  will  feel  intense  regret  in  his  heart.    As  a 
result  of  such  regret,  while  eating,  he  will  be  unable  to  distinguish 
between  tasty  and  tasteless  food,  and  at  night  he  will  be  unable  to 
sleep.    As  long  as  the avgun of the sant is  not  removed  from  the 
person’s heart, he will continue to experience extreme guilt, just like 
a fish will suffer without water. 
 
1.32
 “On the other hand, when he intensely perceives gun in  that sant, 
then if that sant has been hurt in any way, he would please him with 
absolute humbleness.  If this type of thought remains in a person’s 
heart,  then  even  if  he  has  perceived avgun in  that sant,  they  would 
still  be  overcome,  and  he  would  not  fall  from satsang.    Apart  from 
that, there is no other solution; this is the only solution.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Loyã || 1 || 109 || 
 
 
Loyã – 2 
Faith, Gnãn, Courage, Or Love 
 
2.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Kãrtik  vad 11  [1
st
 December,  1820], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  facing  south  on  a 
decorated  bedstead  in  Surã  Khãchar’s darbãr in   Loyã.      He   was 
wearing  a  red, kinkhãb survãl and  a  black, kinkhãb dagli with  the 
word ‘Nar-Nãrãyan’ imprinted upon it.  Around His head, he had tied 
a sky-blue coloured feto with golden threads along the edges, from a 
town  called  Burãnpur.    He  had  also  tied  an  orange feto around  His 

LOYÃ 
- 311 - 
waist.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places, 
had  gathered  before  Him.    Muktãnand  Swãmi  and  other paramhans 
were singing kirtans to the accompaniment of a dukad, sarodã, satãr, 
and manjirã. 
 
2.2
 After the singing had concluded, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “O paramhans, 
please listen.  I wish to ask you a question.” 
 
2.3
 The munis said, “Mahãrãj, please ask.” 
 
2.4
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “In this satsang,  when  does  a bhakta 
become free from the fear of death and become convinced of his own 
kalyãn in this very life?” 
 
2.5
 Muktãnand Swãmi replied as best as he could, but was unable to give 
a   precise   answer   to   Shreeji  Mahãrãj’s  question.    So,  the  other 
paramhans requested,  “Mahãrãj,  you  will  have  to  answer  that 
question.” 
 
2.6
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  began,  “While  you  were  singing kirtans,   I 
thought  about  this.    In  my  mind,  I  feel  that  there  are  four  types  of 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn who   no   longer   fear   death   and   who   feel 
completely  fulfilled.    These  four  types  are:    first,  a  person  who  has 
faith;  second,  a  person  with gnãn;  third,  a  person  with  courage;  and 
fourth,  a  person  with  love.    These  four  types  of bhaktas do  not  fear 
death, and they feel fulfilled while still alive. 
 
2.7
 “I  shall  now  describe  the  characteristics  of  these  four  types  of 
bhaktas.  A bhakta who has faith, has established absolute faith in the 
words  of Bhagvãn and  His sant.    Therefore,  by  the  strength  of  his 
faith  in Bhagvãn,  he  does  not  fear  death.    Also,  he  believes, ‘I have 
attained  the  pratyaksha  Purushottam  Bhagvãn,  and  therefore  I  am 
fulfilled’. 
 

LOYÃ 
- 312 - 
2.8
 “A bhakta with gnãn,  has  the  strength  of ãtmã-gnãn,  and  believes, ‘I 
am  brahm-svarup  and  a  bhakta  of Bhagvãn’.  Therefore,  he  too  does 
not fear death. 
 
2.9
 “All the indriyas and antah-karans tremble with fear before a bhakta 
who  has  courage.    Also,  he  is  not  afraid  of  anyone.    So,  he  does  not 
disobey  any  of Bhagvãn’s ãgnã in  any  way.    As  a  result,  he  believes 
himself  to  be  fulfilled  and  does  not  have  even  the  slightest  fear  of 
death. 
 
2.10
 “The fourth, who has love, has the nature of a pati-vratã wife.    The 
vrutti of  a pati-vratã wife  is  not  drawn  to  anyone  except  her  own 
husband,  and  she  has  love  only  for her  husband.    Similarly,  this 
bhakta of Bhagvãn,  like  a pati-vratã,  has  love  only  for  his  master, 
Bhagvãn.  As a result, he believes himself to be fulfilled and does not 
have even the slightest fear of death. 
 
2.11
 “Out  of  these  four  types  of  characteristics,   even   if   only   one   is 
predominant and the other three are minor, a person still overcomes 
the fear of births and deaths.  But if a person does not have any one of 
the four, then his fear of death is not overcome.” 
 
2.12
 Having  said  this,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj asked  all  the paramhans and  other 
bhaktas,  “Of  these  four,  please  declare  which  characteristic  is 
predominant  within  you.”    So,  all  the paramhans and bhaktas 
described  whichever  characteristic  was  predominant  within  them.  
Hearing this, Shreeji Mahãrãj was very pleased. 
 
2.13
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj continued, “Of these four types, all those who 
have  the  characteristic  of  courage  may  come  near  and  bow  down  at 
my feet.”  Those who had the characteristic of courage, placed Shreeji 
Mahãrãj’s holy feet on their chests and bowed down before Him. 
 
2.14
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Those who wish to ask a question, please 
ask.” 

LOYÃ 
- 313 - 
2.15
 Brahmãnand Swãmi then asked, “That which is the cause should be 
greater  than  its  effect.    Why,  then  does  a  large  tree  arise  from  the 
small seed of a banyan tree?” 
 
2.16
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A cause may be small and subtle, yet it is 
still  capable of  producing  a  vast  effect – that  is  the  very  greatness  of 
the cause.  For example, the entities evolved from Mul-Prakruti – the 
countless Pradhãns – occupy an immense region, whereas the cause – 
Mul-Prakruti – has  the svarup of  a  female.    In  the  same  way,  smell, 
which  is  the  cause  of pruthvi,  is  subtle,  whereas  the  entity  evolved 
from  it, pruthvi,  is  large.    Similarly, ãkãsh and  the  other  four bhuts 
occupy  a  vast  area,  but  their  causes,  such  as  sound  and  touch,  are 
subtle.  Therefore, the cause may be small, but it still has the ability to 
produce a vast effect; this is its capability. 
 
2.17
 “For example, Agni-Dev possesses a svarup like that of a man; and his 
size  is  like  that  of  a  man;  but  his  effect  (flames  of  fire)  is  large.  
Similarly,  the svarup of Varun-Dev is  the  size  of  a man,  but  his  effect 
(water)  is  very  abundant.    Also,  the svarup of Surya is  seated  in  a 
chariot  like  a  man,  but  his  effect – light – pervades  the  entire 
brahmãnd.    In  the  same  way,  the  cause  of  all, Shree Purushottam-
Nãrãyan is the size of a man, yet He is the cause of countless millions 
of brahmãnds.    But,  a  person  who  is  a  fool  thinks, ‘If the effect is this 
big, then the cause must be so much bigger!’  Actually,  this  is  the 
understanding of a fool. 
 
2.18
 “Bhagvãn, who is the cause of all, appears like a human being; yet by 
His  extraordinary  powers,  He  is  able  to  create countless  millions  of 
brahmãnds from  His  body  and  is  able  to  absorb  them  back  into 
Himself.  For example, Agni, Varun, and Surya appear vast in the form 
of    their    effects,    but    they    withdraw    their    effect    back    within 
themselves, and only they remain.  In the same way, within each and 
every  hair  of Bhagvãn,  countless brahmãnds,  each  composed  of  the 
eight barriers (jad prakruti) and fourteen loks appear as mere atoms.  

LOYÃ 
- 314 - 
In  this  way,  the  cause  is  magnificent  and  full  of  greatness.    So,  a 
person  who  is  wise  realises, ‘Bhagvãn appears like a human, but, in 
fact, He is the cause of all and the creator of all; He is all-powerful’.” 
 
2.19
 Having said this, Shreeji Mahãrãj returned to go to sleep. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Loyã || 2 || 110 || 
 
 
Loyã – 3 
Nishchay In Bhagvãn And The Knowledge Of His Greatness 
 
3.1
 In the Samvat year 1877, on the night of Kãrtik vad 13 [3
rd
 December, 
1820],  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  in  Surã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Loyã.    He  was  wearing  a  white dagli made  of 
chhint and  a  white,  cotton-padded survãl.    He  had  also  tied  a  white 
feto around His head, and covered Himself with a white pachhedi.  A 
sabhã of munis, as well as satsangis from various places, had gathered 
before Him. 
 
3.2
 Then,  Bhagvadãnand  Swãmi  and  Shivãnand  Swãmi  asked  Shreeji 
Mahãrãj, “What are the characteristics of a person who has nishchay 
in Bhagvãn and   His sant coupled   with   the   knowledge   of   their 
greatness?” 
 
3.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “What would a person who has nishchay in 
Bhagvãn and His sant coupled with the knowledge of their greatness 
not  do  for  the  sake  of Bhagvãn and  His sant?    For  them,  he  would 
leave   his   family,   give   up   any   fear   of   public   ridicule,   give   up   a 
kingdom, give up pleasures, give up wealth, leave his wife, and in the 
case of a woman, she would leave her husband.” 
 
3.4
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  narrated  the  stories  of  the  following bhaktas:  
Rajput    Galuji    of    the    village    Dadusar;    Kushal-Kunvar-Bãi    of 
Dharmapur;  Parvat-Bhãi;  Rãjbai;  Jeevu-Bã;  Lãdu-Bã;  Motã  Rãmbai; 

LOYÃ 
- 315 - 
Dãdã  Khãchar;  Mãnchã  Bhakta;  Mulji  Brahm-Chãri;  Lãdhi-Bãi  and 
Mãtãji  of  Bhuj;  Muktãnand  Swãmi;  Sãmat  Patel,  an  Ãhir  from  the 
Vãlãk  region;  Mulji  and  Krishnaji  of  the  village  Mankuvã;  the  two 
Kãthi bhatkas of  the  village  Gundãli  in  the  Vãlãk region;  and  other 
satsangis.    Mahãrãj  described  in  detail  whatever  they  had  done  for 
the sake of Bhagvãn and His sant. 
 
3.5
 Then, He added, “A person who has nishchay in Bhagvãn coupled 
with   knowledge   of   His   greatness,   never   disobeys   the   words   of 
Bhagvãn; he  does  as Bhagvãn says.”  Having said this, He asked, 
“What was my nature like?  Well, I was such a tyãgi that I could stay 
in  one  place  as  long  as  the  time  interval  between  the  morning  and 
evening  milking  of  cows,  not  any  longer.    I  had  intense vairãgya.  
Moreover,  I  had  deep  love  for  Rãmãnand  Swãmi.    Therefore,  when 
Swãmi  sent  a  message  from  the  city  of  Bhuj  via  Mayãram  Bhatt, 
saying, ‘If you desire to stay in satsang, you will have to stay by 
embracing  its  pillar’.  I  literally  embraced  a  pillar.    Seeing  this, 
Mayãrãm  Bhatt  said, ‘You should live according to Muktãnand Swãmi 
for  nine  months.  So,  a  person  who  has  the  previously  mentioned 
nishchay in Bhagvãn and   His sant can   also   be   known   by   this 
characteristic.”  Shreeji Mahãrãj then narrated the stories of Sundarji 
Suthãr and Dosã Vãniyã. 
 
3.6
 After  mentioning  that  a  person  who  has  such nishchay in Bhagvãn 
and  His sant has  constant  enthusiasm,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  narrated  the 
story of Rãnã Rãjgar. 
 
3.7
 Next, Shreeji Mahãrãj narrated the story of Prahlãd:  “Prahlãd said to 
Nrusinhji, ‘Mahãrãj, I am not afraid of this terrifying svarup of yours.  
Moreover,  I  do  not  consider  your  protection  of  me  as  true  protection.  
Instead, when you save me from my enemy’s army (the indriyas), I shall 
consider  that  to  be  true protection’.  Therefore,  a bhakta of Bhagvãn 
would  not  be  overjoyed  if Bhagvãn were  to  protect  him  physically; 

LOYÃ 
- 316 - 
and he would not be disappointed if he were not protected.  Instead, 
he would remain carefree and continue to worship Bhagvãn. 
 
3.8
 “Moreover, he would intensely understand the greatness of Bhagvãn 
and  His sant.”  Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj narrated the story of the old 
lady from the village Kathlãl. 
 
3.9
 Continuing,  He  said,  “Even  if  such  a bhakta – with nishchay in 
Bhagvãn and His sant coupled with the knowledge of their greatness 
– were to die painfully; or if a tiger were to devour him; or if a snake 
were to bite him; or if a weapon were to strike him; or if he were to 
drown  in  water;  or  if  he  were  to  die  in  any  other  horrific  way;  he 
would   still   believe, ‘A  bhakta  of  Bhagvãn  never  suffers  from  an 
unpleasant outcome; he will certainly attain the dhãm of Bhagvãn.  On 
the  other  hand,  even  if  a  vimukh  were  to  die  naturally  and  were  to  be 
cremated  in  a  funeral  pyre  with  sandalwood  and  the full  funeral  rites, 
he will certainly go to Yampuri’.  He would understand the difference 
between the two extremely clearly. 
 
310
 “So, a person who develops such firm belief in his heart should be 
known  as having nishchay in Bhagvãn and  His sant coupled  with  the 
knowledge  of  their  greatness.    A  person  with  such nishchay will 
definitely  reach Brahm-Mahol;  he  would  not  reside  in  any  other 
lower dhãm.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Loyã || 3 || 111 || 
 
 
Loyã – 4 
A Person With Doubts 
 
4.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Kãrtik  vad 14  [4
th
 December,  1820], 
three  hours  after  sunrise,  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was 
sitting in Surã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Loyã.    He  was  wearing  a  white 

LOYÃ 
- 317 - 
survãl and  a  white dagli made  of chhint.    He  had  also  tied  a  white 
pãgh around His head.  A sabhã of paramhans, as well as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
4.2
 Then,  Akhandãnand  Swãmi  asked  Shreeji  Mahãrãj,  “There  are 
countless millions of brahmãnds.  In those brahmãnds, does the murti 
of Bhagvãn appear  the  same  as  the murti in  this brahmãnd at  this 
present time, or not?” 
 
4.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Bhagvãn always resides in His Akshardhãm.  
From the countless Pradhãn-Purush pairs that evolve from Mul-Mãyã, 
countless  millions  of brahmãnds evolve.    Then,  for  the  sake  of  His 
bhaktas,  while  still  residing  at  one  location  in  His Akshardhãm,  and 
by  His  own  wish,  that Bhagvãn appears  in  countless svarups in  the 
countless millions of brahmãnds.” 
 
4.4
 Again, Akhandãnand Swãmi asked, “Shree  Krishna-Nãrãyan always 
has  a  human svarup,  and  the svarup of Bhagvãn is  forever satya.  
However,  that  same Bhagvãn appears  sometimes  as Matsya, Kurma, 
Varãh, Nrusinh,  and  other  countless svarups.    How  should  this  be 
understood?    Furthermore,  is  the  method  of kalyãn and  the murti of 
Bhagvãn in each brahmãnd the same, or different?” 
 
4.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The murti of Bhagvãn is  always  the  same.  
Even then, by His own wish, Bhagvãn shows His murti wherever and 
in   whatever murti is   required.      He   also   reveals   His   powers   to 
whatever extent is appropriate in various places.  He always has two 
arms,  but  by  His  wish,  at  times  He  appears  with  four  arms,  or  eight 
arms, or even countless arms.  He also appears in svarups like Matsya 
and Kurma.    In  this  way,  He  incarnates  in  whichever svarup is 
appropriate for the place.  However, He always resides in His dhãm in 
one svarup. 
 

LOYÃ 
- 318 - 
4.6
 “Furthermore,  while  remaining  in  one location,  He pervades  the 
countless  millions  of brahmãnds through  His antaryãmi svarup.    For 
example, Vyãsji was  one,  but  when  he  called  out  to  Shukji,  he  did  so 
by  residing  in  all  the sthãvar and jangam beings.    When  Shukji 
replied, he did so in the same way.  In this way, even great yogis like 
Shukji are  capable  of  pervading  the  entire  world.    Such  people  have 
attained   such   extraordinary   powers   as   rewards   of   worshipping 
Bhagvãn.  But, Purushottam Bhagvãn, who is called Yogeshvar, is the 
master  of  all  extraordinary  powers.    So,  while  still  remaining  in  one 
location, what is surprising about Him incarnating, by His own wish, 
wherever  and  however  is  appropriate?    What  is  so  surprising  about 
Bhagvãn possessing  such  abilities?    People  become  astonished  even 
when  a  magician  displays  simple  illusions,  and  they  cannot  fully 
comprehend  the  magic.    But, Bhagvãn possesses  all  extraordinary 
powers  and  is  the  greatest  source  of  wonder.    So,  how  can  the jeev 
know Him? 
 
4.7
 “The  Shreemad  Bhãgvat  mentions, ‘This  many  have  overcome 
Bhagvãn’s mãyã’.  However,  it  also  mentions, ‘No one has overcome 
the force of Bhagvãn’s mãyã’.  Here,  a  person  should realise  that  if 
even   those   like Brahmã were   to   doubt Bhagvãn’s extraordinary 
powers,  then  they  cannot  be  said  to  have  overcome  the  power  of 
Bhagvãn’s mãyã.    What  is  this  doubt?    It  is  the  thought, ‘Why does 
Bhagvãn  behave  like  that?’  On   the   other   hand,   a person   who 
understands ‘Bhagvãn is  extremely  powerful;  so  whatever  He  does  is 
appropriate’, is said to have overcome mãyã. 
 
4.8
 “In reality, the method for kalyãn is  the same;  but because  there  are 
three  levels  in  the  people  who  worship  (uttam, madhyam, kanishth), 
and  because  there  are  countless  levels  in  their shraddhã,  there  are 
many differences in the path of kalyãn taken by people.  However, in 
reality,  there  is  only  one  path  of kalyãn.    After  all,  there  is  only  one 
svarup of Bhagvãn.  This Bhagvãn is extremely powerful and no one, 
including Akshar,   is   capable   of   becoming   like   Him.      This   is   an 
established principle.” 

LOYÃ 
- 319 - 
4.9
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi said to Shreeji Mahãrãj, “Today, Jhinã-Bhãi 
has become very upset, and he said that since Mahãrãj did not come 
to my house, what is the point of me staying in that house?” 
 
4.10
 Hearing this, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “When a person loves by force and 
with unhappiness, that love does not survive for very long.  Also, the 
bhakti and  love  of  a  person  who  is  unhappy,  is  ultimately  abolished.  
Therefore, it is a great mistake to wear a sad face due to displeasure.” 
 
4.11
 Jhinã-Bhãi then said, “When Bhagvãn and His sant come to a person’s 
house, his face should glow with delight; but when they do not come, 
his  face  should definitely  reflect  disappointment  and  he  should  feel 
sorrow in his heart.” 
 
4.12
 Hearing  this  remark,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “A  person  should  be 
pleased  when Bhagvãn and  His sãdhus  come,  but  he  should  never 
grieve.      If   his   nature   is   to   grieve,   then   ultimately,   something 
misfortunate  is  bound  to  occur.    Therefore,  while  following  his  own 
dharma,  a  person  should  happily  follow Bhagvãn’s  ãgnã,  but  he 
should  never  become  upset  in  order  to  get his own  way.   If Bhagvãn 
issues  an ãgnã to  go  somewhere  and  the  person  becomes  disturbed 
out   of   grief,   then   the darshan and prasãd previously   given   by 
Bhagvãn,  the  countless  types  of  talks  relating  to gnãn,  and  all  other 
actions by which he had felt happiness, are all lost.  Furthermore, due 
to  the  disturbance,  only tamo-gun spreads  throughout  the  mind.  
Therefore, he goes where he is asked to go in a state of pure misery.  
Then,  as  a  result  of  the  distress,  he  cannot  carry  out  the ãgnã 
completely.    Therefore,  a bhakta of Bhagvãn should  remain  ever 
joyful and should worship Bhagvãn with a cheerful mind.  Moreover, 
however  unpleasant  his  circumstances  may  be,  he  should  not  allow 
even the slightest trace of depression to enter his heart.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Loyã || 4 || 112 || 
 

LOYÃ 
- 320 - 
Loyã – 5 
Controlling The Indriyas And The Antah-Karans 
 
5.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on  the  night  of Kãrtik  vad  Amãs [5
th
 
December,  1820],  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  in 
Surã Khãchar’s darbãr in Loyã.  He was wearing a white survãl and a 
white dagli made of chhint.  He had also tied a white pãgh around His 
head.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various 
places, had gathered before Him. 
 
5.2
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  all  the paramhans, “By revealing which 
thoughts  can  a  person  be  considered  to  be honest,  and  by  not 
revealing   which   thoughts   can   a   person   be   considered   to   be 
deceitful?” 
 
5.3
 As  the paramhans were  unable  to  answer,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied, 
“Any weakness in following the panch-vartmãn,  which  cannot  be 
overcome by a thought process, should be revealed before a sant who 
has  no  such  weaknesses.    If  a  person  has  perceived avgun in  a sant, 
that   should   also   be   revealed.      Furthermore,   any   doubts   in   his 
nishchay in Bhagvãn should  also  be  revealed.    Only  then  can  he  be 
considered  to  be  honest.    If  any  of  these  internal  thoughts  have 
arisen,  and  they  are  not  revealed  before  a sant,  then  such  a  person 
should be known to be deceitful.” 
 
5.4
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  another  question:    “If  a  person  is 
deceitful, and also cunning, how can he be recognised?” 
 
5.5
 Again, the paramhans were unable to answer. 
 
5.6
 So, Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “His deceitfulness can be recognised by 
keeping  his  company;  and  while  staying  with  him,  by  observing  him 
while  he  eats,  drinks,  sits,  stands,  walks,  and  talks.   Also,  when 
separated  from  him,  if  another  person  is  asked  to  secretly  observe 
him, then his deceitfulness would be recognised.” 

LOYÃ 
- 321 - 
5.7
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then posed another question:  “Suppose there is a 
person  who  follows  the vartmãn and  keeps nishchay in Bhagvãn out 
of pretence.  He is intelligent and arrogant, and he shows his nishchay 
and  his  observance  of  the vartmãn to  be  more  superior  than  the 
genuine vartmãn and nishchay of others.  So, how can a person’s false 
nishchay and observance of vartmãn be recognised?” 
 
5.8
 Once again, the paramhans were unable to answer the question. 
 
5.9
 So, Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “His pretence can be recognised when his 
reputation is insulted.  Otherwise, it cannot be recognised.” 
 
5.10
 Again, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Which thought  causes  a  person  to 
deflect  from  his nishchay in Bhagvãn and  observance  of vartmãn?  
Which  type  of  thought  would  not  cause  a  person  to  deflect  from 
them?    Also,  if  there  is  a  time  span,  for  what  duration  must  these 
thoughts remain in order to deflect a person from his dharma and his 
nishchay in Bhagvãn?” 
 
5.11
 Again, the paramhans were unable to answer. 
 
5.12
 So,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “If  a  person  attempts  to  eradicate  an 
improper  thought  related  to dharma,  but  the  thought  still  remains; 
or, if such a thought does not arise for fifteen days or for a month, but 
arises  someday  suddenly – then  such  a  thought  would  cause  him  to 
fall   from dharma.    The  same  applies  to  a  person’s nishchay in 
Bhagvãn.    However,  any  thought  which  is  eradicated  by  applying  a 
thought process once it arises, and which does not arise again, would 
not cause a person to fall from his dharma or his nishchay.” 
 
5.13
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Whose foundation in satsang becomes 
solid, and whose does not?” 
 
5.14
 Once again, the paramhans could not answer. 

LOYÃ 
- 322 - 
5.15
 So, Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Dattãtrey perceived  the gun of the  five 
mahã-bhuts, the moon, various animals, a prostitute, a virgin, his own 
body,  and  many  others.    Similarly,  if  a  person  has  the  nature  of 
perceiving  the gun of  a sãdhu,  his foundation  in satsang will  become 
solid.    If  a  person  does  not  have  such  a  nature  then  even  though  he 
remains in satsang, his foundation is not firm.” 
 
5.16
 Again, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Can the indriyas and the antah-karans 
in  a  person  be  completely  controlled  by  the  company  of  the sant,  by 
reading  the shãstras,  and  by  applying his  own  thought  process?    Or 
can they be controlled if only one of these three is present?  If you say 
that  all  three  must  be  present,  then  what  methods  should  be  learnt 
from  a sant,  what  methods  should  be  learnt  from  the shãstras,  and 
how  would a  person  apply  his  own  thought  process?    Please  explain 
this.” 
 
5.17
 Again, the paramhans were unable to answer. 
 
5.18
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “From the shãstras, a person should 
realise  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn and  His sant.    From  the sant,  a 
person   should   learn   methods   for   controlling   the indriyas.      For 
example, a person’s vision should be kept fixed on the nose in this 
way,  and  he  should  not  listen  to  worldly  talks.    These  and  other 
methods should be learnt from a sant.  By his own thought process, a 
person  should  look  positively  upon  the  methods  taught  by  the sant, 
as being for his own kalyãn.  Then, he should behave accordingly.  In 
this  way,  the indriyas and antah-karans can  be  overcome  by  these 
three methods.” 
 
5.19
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj posed another question, “Are the antah-karans 
controlled  by  controlling  the indriyas,  or  are  the indriyas controlled 
by controlling the antah-karans?” 
 
5.20
 Since the paramhans could not answer the question, Shreeji Mahãrãj 
replied, “If a person controls  the  physical indriyas by  physical tap, 
and  then  even  after  the  physical indriyas have  been  controlled,  if  he 

LOYÃ 
- 323 - 
still  firmly  follows  the niyams of  the panch-vartmãn,  then  the antah-
karans can be controlled by controlling the physical indriyas.  So, the 
physical indriyas cannot   be   controlled   by   controlling   the antah-
karans alone.      However,   the antah-karans can   be   controlled   by 
controlling  the  physical indriyas.    How  is  that?    Well,  if  a  person 
controls  the  physical indriyas and  does  not  let  them  indulge  in  the 
vishays,  then  the antah-karans within  would  become  frustrated  and 
would think, ‘This type of enjoyment is not going to be possible in this 
life’.’’ 
 
5.21
 After this, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “By what method are the physical 
indriyas controlled   and   by   what   method   are   the antah-karans 
controlled?” 
 
5.22
 Again,   since   the paramhans could   not   answer,   Shreeji   Mahãrãj 
replied, “The physical indriyas can  be  controlled  by  following  the 
niyams specified  for  a tyãgi in  the  Dharma-Shãstras;  by  controlling 
the  diet;  by  following vrat like tapta-kruchhra and chãndrãyan;  by 
deliberately  tolerating  cold,  heat,  hunger,  and  thirst;  by  engaging  in 
the kathã,  talks,  and kirtans of Bhagvãn;  by  engaging  in bhajan and 
smaran;  by  controlling  the  posture;  and  by  many  other  spiritual 
activities.  The antah-karans of a person can be controlled by thinking 
of Bhagvãn’s greatness,  by  performing dhyãn upon Bhagvãn,  and  by 
realising himself to be the ãtmã.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Loyã || 5 || 113 || 
 
 
Loyã – 6 
Purifying The Company A Person Keeps 
The Difficulties Of Becoming An Ekãntik Bhakta 
 
6.1
 In   the Samvat year   1877,   on   the   night   of Mãgshar   sud 1   [6
th
 
December,  1820],  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  in  Surã  Khãchar’s 
darbãr in Loyã.  He was wearing a white khes and a white dagli made 

LOYÃ 
- 324 - 
of chhint.  He had also tied a white feto around His head and had tied 
a bokãni with  another feto.    The chhoglu of  the  white feto was 
hanging  from  His  head.    In  addition  to  this,  He  had  covered  Himself 
with  a chãdar.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
6.2
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  the paramhans, “After joining satsang, 
what do you consider to be the most difficult achievement?” 
 
6.3
 The paramhans could  not  answer  the  question,  so  Shreeji  Mahãrãj 
replied, “For a person to become ekãntik is extremely difficult.  What 
is this state of being ekãntik?  Well, it is to do bhakti of Bhagvãn along 
with dharma, gnãn, and vairãgya.  That is the state of being ekãntik.” 
 
6.4
 Again, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Which one activity related to dharma 
is such that if it is practiced, all aspects of dharma remain?  Moreover, 
out  of bhajan, smaran,  singing  or  listening  to kirtans,  listening  to 
talks,  and  other  spiritual  activities,  which  one  activity,  if  it  is  kept 
even when all others are abandoned in difficult times, helps maintain 
all of the others?” 
 
6.5
 Shreeji   Mahãrãj answered  His  own  question:    “Of  the  activities 
related to dharma, if a person maintains the vow of nishkãm, all other 
activities  will  develop.    Of  the  spiritual  activities,  if  a  person  keeps 
nishchay in Bhagvãn, then all of the others will develop.” 
 
6.6
 Again, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Which type of thinking, if maintained 
constantly,  is  beneficial;  and  if  altered,  is  destructive?    Also,  which 
type  of  thinking  is  beneficial  if  repeatedly  altered,  and  destructive  if 
not altered?” 
 
6.7
 Again,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  answered  His  own  question:    “Thoughts 
regarding a person’s nishchay in Bhagvãn should never be altered.  It 
is  beneficial  if  they  are  repeatedly  reinforced  by  listening  to  the 
greatness  of Bhagvãn.    Conversely,  repeatedly  altering  them  would 
be  destructive.    However,  if  a  person  has  firmly  decided  in  his  own 

LOYÃ 
- 325 - 
mind, ‘I  want  to  do  this’,   then   that   type   of   thinking   should   be 
repeatedly  altered  on  the  advice  of  a sãdhu.    If  the sãdhu suggests, 
‘You should not sit here and should not do this’,  then  a  person  should 
not sit there and should not do that.  If his own decision is altered, it 
would be beneficial; if it is not altered and he does as he pleases, then 
that would be destructive.” 
 
6.8
 Again, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “By sitting with and listening to which 
type of satsangi or paramhans would make him subject to developing 
faults, despite the fact that he follows dharma?” 
 
6.9
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If a person has nishchay in Bhagvãn and 
follows dharma,  but  also  believes  himself  to  be  the  body  and  has 
pride as well as desires for worldly activities, then if Bhagvãn and His 
sant criticise  these,  he  will  definitely  perceive avgun in Bhagvãn and 
His sant.    Then,  he  will  talk  about  the  perceived avgun of Bhagvãn 
and  His sant to  others,  and  cause  them  to  become  like  a vimukh.    A 
bhakta should not associate with such a person in any way; doing so 
is harmful.” 
 
6.10
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Which type of sãdhu,  even  though  he 
follows dharma and  has nishchay in Bhagvãn,  should  a  person  not 
accompany to bathe, sleep near, or hear talks from?” 
 
6.11
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  answered  His  own  question:    “A sãdhu who 
discouragingly says, ‘Can the vow of nishkãm and other qualities really 
be  attained  in  one  life?    They  are  attained  only  by  the  grace  of 
Bhagvãn;  otherwise  kalyãn  is  attained  after  countless  lives.    So,  can 
kalyãn truly be attained in this very life?’  A  person  should  shun  the 
company    of    anyone    who    speaks    such    discouraging    words.  
Conversely, someone else claims, ‘We are fulfilled in this very life.  The 
force  of  kãm,  krodh,  mad,  matsar,  mãn,  and  other  vicious  natures  is 
small.  By the grace of Bhagvãn and His sant, we will destroy them all’.  
A  person  should,  by  all  means,  seek  the  company  of  a sãdhu who 
speaks in this way and is eagerly engaged in methods to destroy the 
vicious natures.” 

LOYÃ 
- 326 - 
6.12
 Again, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Which type of sãdhu, even if he speaks 
encouragingly, should be shunned?” 
 
6.13
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered His own question:  “If a sãdhu emphasises 
his  own  efforts  only  and  believes  himself  to  be  fulfilled  by  his  own 
efforts,  but  does  not  acknowledge  the  strength  of Bhagvãn and  does 
not feel, ‘By acting in this way, I want to please Bhagvãn’, then such a 
sãdhu should be shunned.” 
 
6.14
 Again, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Which type of sãdhu should  a  person 
keep  the  company  of,  and  which  type  should  a  person  not  keep  the 
company of?” 
 
6.15
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then replied, “If we are staying with a sãdhu who 
follows  the vartmãn strictly  and  has  firm nishchay in Bhagvãn,  but 
instead of lecturing us, he pampers us and lets us have our way, then 
even  if  he  is  considered  great  in  public  opinion,  like  Muktãnand 
Swãmi, his company should not be kept.  On the other hand, if a sãdhu 
repeatedly  lectures  a  person,  and  maintains  constant  awareness  on 
any svabhãv he  sees  within  him;  and  if  he  does  not  stop  criticising 
that svabhãv until it is overcome, and does not compliment him, then 
even if he is not considered great in public view, a person should still 
keep his company.” 
 
6.16
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked another question:  “Suppose a sãdhu 
possesses  all  the  glorious  qualities  like bhakti and gnãn.    However, 
due to which one vicious flaw, should a person avoid his company?” 
  
6.17
 Again, Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If he is very lazy, sleeps too much, 
and  when  told  by  others to  bathe,  perform dhyãn, or  to  follow  other 
niyams, says, ‘I’ll do it later, what’s the hurry?  I’ll do them slowly’, then 
even  though  he  may  appear  to  be  good,  a  person  should  avoid  his 
company.” 
 
6.18
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  another  question:  “A sãdhu may  speak  well; 
but, due to which fault in his speech should his talks not be heard?” 

LOYÃ 
- 327 - 
6.19
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then replied, “Out of arrogance, if he talks about the 
bhakti, gnãn, vairãgya, and dharma within himself to be superior; and 
shows the gun of bhakti, gnãn, vairãgya, and dharma in other sãdhus 
to be inferior, then a person should not listen to his talks.” 
 
6.20
 Once again, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Which type of speech should be 
viewed as amrut even though it is harsh?” 
 
6.21
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj replied, “The words of a sãdhu who  in  his  speech 
criticises  his  own  parents,  sister,  brother,  and varna,  and ãshram 
with  harsh  words,  should  be  known  to  be  good.    This  is  because  a 
person  who  hears  those  words  realises  the  qualities  of  that sãdhu, 
and  thinks: ‘In no way does this sãdhu have attachment to his bodily 
relations’.  Therefore, those words should be enjoyed like amrut.” 
 
6.22
 Shreeji Mahãrãj posed another question, “When should a person 
maintain pride, and when should a person not maintain pride?” 
 
6.23
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered once again:  “A person should not maintain 
pride before a devoted follower of Bhagvãn, even though he may be a 
simple  and  humble haribhakta.    On  the  other  hand,  a  person  should 
certainly  maintain  pride  before a  person  who  has  fallen  back  from 
satsang.  In fact, a person should not become suppressed by him; and 
in  any  question-answer  exchange,  his  words  should  be  answered 
with harsh words.” 
 
6.24
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “When should a person have a desire 
for  the darshan of Bhagvãn and  His sant?    When  should  he  not  have 
such a desire?” 
 
6.25
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Suppose I were to ask all the sãdhus, ‘Who 
will go to Burãnpur and Kãshi?’  Then, when no one speaks, someone 
should rise in the sabhã and say to me, ‘Mahãrãj, if you say so, I shall 
go’.  So  saying,  he  should  follow  my ãgnã and  go  there.    In  those 

LOYÃ 
- 328 - 
situations, to gain my happiness, a person should not keep any desire 
for keeping the company of sant or my darshan. 
 
6.26
 “Moreover,  when  a  person – who   a sãdhu or   I   have   criticised, 
lectured,  insulted,  or  expelled,  and  who  is  crying  out  of  shock – is 
approached by an ekadmal vimukh who starts to talk about the avgun 
of  the sãdhu or  me,  then  before  him,  the  person  should  reveal 
tremendous  love  towards the sãdhu and Bhagvãn.    He  should  say, ‘I 
am  his  servant,  and  even  if  he  were  to  cut  me  to  pieces,  I  still  would 
never perceive avgun in him.  He will grant me kalyãn’.    In  that 
situation, he should reveal great love.” 
 
6.27
 Again,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked, “What should not be done, even if 
Bhagvãn is  pleased  by  it?    What  should  be  done,  even  if Bhagvãn is 
displeased by it?” 
 
6.28
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered His own questions:  “If I were to give an 
order  which  seems  to  be  full  of adharma,  then  a  person  should  be 
hesitant  in  following  it;  he  should  take  some  time  and  not  accept  it 
immediately.    For  example, Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn ordered  Arjun, 
‘Cut off Ashvatthãmã’s head’.  But,  Arjun  did  not  follow  that ãgnã.  
Likewise,  even  if  I  am  pleased  by  it,  that  type  of  instruction  should 
not be followed.  Also, an instruction by which the prescribed niyams 
of the panch-vartmãn are disobeyed should not be followed.  If by not 
obeying  these  two  types  of ãgnã, Bhagvãn is displeased,  then  a 
person  should  definitely  let  Him  be  displeased;  in  those  cases,  a 
person should not attempt to please Him.” 
 
6.29
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  again,  “While  performing dhyãn upon 
Bhagvãn,  countless  different  waves  of  vicious  thoughts  arises  in the 
mind, just as large waves arise in the ocean.  When such thoughts do 
arise, how can they be suppressed?” 
 

LOYÃ 
- 329 - 
6.30
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered His own question:  “When such vicious 
thoughts  arise,  a  person  should  stop  the dhyãn,  and  should  clap  and 
chant ‘Swãminarayan, Swãminarayan’ loudly,  without  shame.    He 
should pray to Bhagvãn, ‘O lord!  You are a friend of the humble!  You 
are an ocean of mercy!’  Also,  he  should  remember  a  great sãdhu of 
Bhagvãn, like Muktãnand Swãmi, and pray to him too.  As a result of 
this, all disturbing thoughts will be eradicated, and peace will prevail.  
Apart from this, there is no other method to eradicate such thoughts.” 
 
6.31
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  posed  another  question:    “Which  quality 
should be abandoned, even if it is believed to be a great quality in this 
satsang and  is  being  praised  by  all?    Which  fault,  even  though  it  is  a 
fault, is suitable to be absorbed?” 
 
6.32
 Once again, Shreeji Mahãrãj supplied the answer Himself:  “A person 
may  be  like  Muktãnand  Swãmi  and  may  be  following  the vartmãn 
strictly  than  all.    However,  as  a  result  of  this,  if  another sãdhu feels 
inferior  because  he  cannot  behave  on  the  same  level,  then  that 
quality, even  though it may  be  great, should  be  abandoned.   Instead, 
he  should  behave  on  the  same  level  as  all  the  other sãdhus.    Even 
though behaving on the same level as others is a drawback, it should 
be done.” 
 
6.33
 Again Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “In these sãdhus,  which  is  the  one  flaw 
which,  when  abandoned,  would  cause  all  flaws  to  be  abandoned?  
Which is the one quality which, if developed, would cause all qualities 
to be developed?” 
 
6.34
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “All flaws in a person reside in the flaw of 
perceiving  himself  with  the  body.    If  that  is  abandoned,  all  flaws  are 
abandoned.      Furthermore,   if   the   sole   quality   of ãtmã-nishthã 
(realising   himself   as   the ãtmã,   and   distinct   from   the   body)   is 
developed, then all qualities will develop.” 
 

LOYÃ 
- 330 - 
6.35
 Shreeji Mahãrãj again asked, “Which types of panch-vishays,  when 
indulged  in,  enlighten  the  mind,  and which  types  of vishays,  when 
indulged in, cause ignorance to prevail in the mind?” 
 
6.36
 Again, Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “By indulging in vishays related  to 
Bhagvãn,   the   mind   is   enlightened;   and   by   indulging   in   worldly 
vishays, ignorance prevails in the mind.” 
 
6.37
 Next, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Which desh, which kãl, which sang, and 
which kriyã should a person not associate with, even if it is Bhagvãn’s 
ãgnã?” 
 
6.38
 Shreeji Mahãrãj again supplied the answer Himself:  “Even if it is 
Bhagvãn’s ãgnã,  a sãdhu should  not  stay  in  a  place  where  he  has 
frequent  contact  with  his  bodily  relations.    Also,  if  I  seat  him  where 
women  can  also  be  seen  while  having darshan,  and  if  I  were  to  say, 
‘Do my darshan’,  then  he  should  not  sit  in  that  place.    Instead,  he 
should  make  an  excuse  and  leave.    In  addition,  if  unpleasant kãl is 
prevailing and riots are taking place, then even if it is Bhagvãn’s ãgnã 
to stay, a person should leave that place; but he should not stay there 
and suffer beatings.” 
 
6.39
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  another  question:    “Which shãstras 
should be heard and studied, and which shãstras should not be heard 
or studied?” 
 
6.40
 Once again, Shreeji Mahãrãj answered Himself, “Shãstras which  do 
not   promote Bhagvãn possessing   a svarup and   do   not   describe 
Bhagvãn’s avatãrs,  but  instead  discuss  pure  Vedãnt  and  propose  a 
single, formless entity, should never be studied or heard; even if they 
have  been  written  by  someone  very  intelligent.    On  the  other  hand, 
simple kirtans,  like  those  composed  by  Ranchhod  Bhakta,  should  be 
sung  and  heard  if  they  describe Bhagvãn’s murti.    Such shãstras 
should only be studied and heard.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Loyã || 6 || 114 || 

LOYÃ 
- 331 - 
Loyã – 7 
The Indriyas, The Antah-Karans, And Experience 
 
7.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Mãgshar  sud 3  [7
th
 December,  1820], 
Shreeji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated   bedstead   in   Surã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Loyã.    He  was  wearing  a  white pãgh,  with  the 
chhoglu hanging on one side.  He was wearing a white dagli made of 
chhint and  a  white,  cotton-padded survãl.    He  had  also  covered 
Himself   with   a   white pachhedi.      A sabhã of munis,   as   well   as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
7.2
 In the sabhã, Nityãnand Swãmi brought the Vachanãmrut manuscript 
and  presented  it  to  Shreeji  Mahãrãj.   Shreeji  Mahãrãj  examined  the 
manuscript  and  was  extremely  pleased  by  it.    He  then  said  to  the 
paramhans, “Today, please ask complex questions so that we may 
have a discussion.” 
 
7.3
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “The Shrutis state: 
 
rute gnãna-na muktihi 
There is no kalyãn without gnãn. 
 
tameva viditvãti-mrutyumeti nãnyaha panthã vidyate-yanãya 
Only by knowing Him does a person go beyond death; there is no other path 
for attaining kalyãn. 
 
 “These shloks state  that  the jeev attains kalyãn only  when  it  realises 
the  true gnãn of Bhagvãn.    If kalyãn can  only  be  attained  by gnãn, 
why   do   the shãstras also   prescribe   other  spiritual   activities   for 
attaining kalyãn?” 
 
7.4
 Hearing this question, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Gnãn means ‘to know’.” 
 
7.5
 At this point, Nityãnand Swãmi raised a doubt.  He said, “If gnãn 
means  merely  ‘to  know’,  then  the  whole  world  knows Bhagvãn 
through the shãstras.  However, not everyone attains kalyãn.” 

LOYÃ 
- 332 - 
7.6
 Hearing this, Shreeji Mahãrãj raised a question, “Just as a person does 
not   attain kalyãn by   knowing   the   previous avatãrs of Bhagvãn 
through  the shãstras,  do  you  think  all  those  who  actually  had  the 
darshan of Rãm, Krishna,  and  other avatãrs of Bhagvãn with  their 
own eyes attained kalyãn?” 
 
7.7
 Muktãnand  Swãmi  replied, “Those who merely see the pratyaksha 
svarup of Bhagvãn only attain kalyãn after several lives.” 
 
7.8
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  added,  “Those  who  know Bhagvãn through   the 
shãstras also  receive kalyãn after  several  lives.    This  is  because  the 
Bhagvãn that  these  people know  through  the shãstras is  the  same 
Bhagvãn other people see with their eyes; and the Bhagvãn that other 
people  see  with  their  eyes  is  the  same Bhagvãn that  people  know 
through  the shãstras.    Therefore,  the  resulting  rewards  of  both  are 
equal, and both attain kalyãn after several lives. 
 
7.9
 “After all, is not hearing Bhagvãn with  the  ears, gnãn?    It  is,  but  that 
can  be  said  to  be  merely  hearing Bhagvãn.    Is  not  touching Bhagvãn 
with  the  skin,  also gnãn?    It  is,  but  that  can  be  said  to  be  merely 
touching Bhagvãn.    Is  not  seeing Bhagvãn with  the  eyes, gnãn?   It  is, 
but  that  can  be  said  to  be  merely  seeing Bhagvãn.    Is  not  smelling 
Bhagvãn with  the  nose, gnãn?    It  is,  but  that  is  merely  smelling 
Bhagvãn.      Does   not   describing Bhagvãn with   the   tongue   also 
constitute gnãn?      It   does,   but   that   is   merely   having   described 
Bhagvãn.    In  this  way, gnãn can  be  attained  through  the  physical 
indriyas.  It can also be attained through the antah-karans, as well as 
directly from the experienced gnãn of the jeev, which is greater than 
both the indriyas and the antah-karans.  Of these, which gnãn are you 
speaking of? 
 
7.10
 “In order to create the universe, Bhagvãn assumed  the svarup of 
Aniruddha;  and  within Aniruddha dwells  the sthãvar and jangam 
world,  along  with ãkãsh.    In  the svarup of Sankarshan, Bhagvãn 

LOYÃ 
- 333 - 
destroys  the  universe.    In  the svarup of Pradyumna,  He  sustains  the 
universe.    He  also  assumes  various avatãrs,  such  as Matsya and 
Kurma.  He assumes these svarup according to whichever task needs 
to  be  accomplished  in  whichever  place.    Some  of  these  tasks  are 
invisible to the indriyas and antah-karans, and can only be known by 
experience.    For  the  successful  completion  of  these  tasks, Bhagvãn 
assumes  a  suitable svarup.    On  the  other  hand,  some  of  these  tasks 
are  visible  to  the indriyas and antah-karans.    For  the  successful 
completion  of  these  tasks,  again Bhagvãn assumes  an  appropriate 
svarup.      Therefore,   the gnãn of   which   of Bhagvãn’s svarup is 
instrumental in attaining kalyãn?  Is that your question?” 
 
7.11
 Nityãnand Swãmi confirmed, “We are saying that kalyãn is  attained 
by the gnãn of Bhagvãn whose svarup can be realised by the indriyas, 
the antah-karans, and experience.” 
 
7.12
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then explained, “That Bhagvãn is Shree  Krishna.    He 
has said of himself: 
 
yasmãt-ksharama-teetohama-kshãradapi chottamaha 
I am greater than all this is perishable, and I am greater than the 
imperishable.  
 
vishtabhyãham-idam krutsnam-ekãnshena sthito jagat 
I sustain the entire universe with a single fragment of myself. 
 
mattaha parataram nãnyat-kinchid-asti dhanamjaya 
mayi sarvam-idam protam sutre maniganã  iva 
O conqueror of wealth (Arjun).  There is nothing at all that is greater than me. 
All this creation is strung upon me – like a series of gems on a thread. 
 
pashya me pãrth rupãni shatasho-tha sahasra-shaha 
nãnã-vidhyãni divyãni nãnã-varna-kruteeni cha 
O Son of Prutha (Arjun)!  Behold my hundreds and thousands of divya svarups 
that are of various types and of assorted colours and shapes. 
 

LOYÃ 
- 334 - 
7.13
 “In these and many other shloks, He describes Himself as invisible to 
the indriyas and  the antah-karans.    Therefore,  knowing Bhagvãn 
perfectly  means  knowing pratyaksha  Bhagvãn through  the indriyas, 
the antah-karans, and experience.  Only then can a person be said to 
possess  perfect gnãn.    However,  if  any  one  of  these  three  types  of 
gnãn is  lacking,  a  person  cannot  be  said  to  have  realised ãtyantik 
gnãn,  nor  can  he  overcome  the  cycle  of  births  and  deaths.    In  fact, 
even  though  someone  may  have  attained  the brahm-svarup state 
through  his  personal  activities,  if  he  does  not  realise pratyaksha 
Bhagvãn in this way, he cannot be said to possess perfect gnãn.  That 
is why it is said in the Shreemad Bhãgvat:  
 
naishkarmyama-pyachuta-bhãva-varjitam na 
shobhate gnãn-malam niranjanam 
Even pure gnãn, in which all karmas have been rejected, is not elegant if it 
does not have bhakti towards Bhagvãn. 
 
7.14
 “The Geetã also states:  
 
karmano haypi boddhavyam boddhavyam cha vikarmanaha 
akarmanash-cha boddhavyam gahana karmano gatihi 
The nature of karma should be understood, the nature of prohibited karmas 
should be understood, and the nature of non-karma should also be understood.  
Indeed, the way of karma is very complex. 
 
 “Even in the state of non-karma (gnãn), there is still something left to 
be  realised.    That  is  to  say,  even  after  a  person  has  become brahm-
rup, he still has to realise Parbrahm Purushottam.  Only a person who 
is brahm-rup has the right to offer bhakti to Purushottam. 
 
7.15
 “Now, what constitutes bhakti?  It is when a person becomes brahm-
rup and performs the bhakti of pratyaksha Bhagvãn with sandalwood 
paste,  flowers, shravan,  and manan – just  as  the niranna-muktas of 
Shvet-Dvip,  having  become brahm-rup,  perform pujã of Parbrahm 
Nãrãyan by  offering  various  types  of  offerings,  such  as  sandalwood 
paste and flowers.  Therefore, Bhagvãn has mentioned in the Geetã: 

LOYÃ 
- 335 - 
brahma-bhootaha prasannãtmã na shochati na kankshati 
samaha sarveshu bhooteshu mad-bhaktim labhate param 
A person who has become brahm-rup remains joyful, grieves nothing, desires 
nothing, behaves equally with all beings, and attains my supreme bhakti. 
 
7.16
 “Therefore, a person who does not offer bhakti to Parbrahm after 
becoming brahm-rup, cannot be said to have attained ãtyantik kalyãn.  
 
bhoomir-aponalo vãyuhu kham mano buddhir-eva cha 
ahankãra iteeyam me bhinnã prakruti-rashtadhã 
These are my eight forms of prakruti – pruthvi, jal, tej, vãyu, ãkãsh, man, 
buddhi, and ahankãr. 
 
“This describes the all-pervaded jad prakruti. 
 
7.17
 “Furthermore, 
 
apareyam-itas-tvanyam prakrutim viddhi me parãm 
jeeva-bhootam mahãbaho yayedam dharyate jagat 
But O mighty-armed Arjun!  Also, know my other prakruti, the very element of 
life (chaitanya), by which this world is upheld.  Such is the all-pervasive 
chaitanya prakruti. 
 
 “This describes the all-pervasive chaitanya prakruti. 
 
7.18
 “That pratyaksha Bhagvãn is such that He is the supporter of both the 
eight  forms  of jad  prakruti and  also  of  the chaitanya prakruti that 
pervades  within.    For  example, ãkãsh is  the  supporter  of  the  other 
four   elements – pruthvi, jal, vãyu,   and tej.      Whenever pruthvi 
contracts, ãkãsh contracts  along  with  it.    When  the pruthvi expands, 
ãkãsh also expands along with it.  Similarly, ãkãsh also contracts and 
expands  along  with  the  contraction  and  expansion  of jal, tej,  and 
vãyu.  However, pruthvi and the other tattvas all contract and expand 
within ãkãsh.  In the same way, Bhagvãn expands and contracts along 
with  the  expansion  and  contraction  of  the  two prakrutis,  while  they 
themselves   contract   and   expand   within Bhagvãn Himself.      That 
Bhagvãn is the ãtmã of all.  This fact is stated in the Shrutis: 

LOYÃ 
- 336 - 
antah-pravishtaha shãstã janãnam sarvãtmã 
Bhagvãn, who enters within all, is the controller and ãtmã of all beings 
 
yasyãksharam shareeram... 
esha sarva-bhootãntarãtmã-pahata-pãpmã divyo, deva eko nãrãyanaha 
He, whose sharir is the imperishable, is the indwelling ãtmã of all beings, is 
without all evil, and is the one divya Bhagvãn Nãrãyan 
 
yasyãtmã shareeram ya ãtmãnam-antaro 
yamayati sa ta ãtmãntaryam-yamrutaha 
He, whose sharir is the ãtmãs, and who governs all ãtmãs from within, is your 
ãtmã, the antaryãmi, and immortal 
 
yasya pruthivi shareeram yaha 
pruthiveem-antaro yamayati sa ta ãtmãntaryãm-yamrutaha 
He, whose sharir is pruthvi and who governs it from within, is your ãtmã, the 
antaryãmi, and is immortal. 
 
7.19
 “Furthermore, even food, the mind, knowledge, and bliss have been 
described  as brahm;  various  such  types  of brahm-vidyã have  been 
mentioned.  What is the significance of this?  Well, those things have 
been  called brahm because Bhagvãn is  the  cause  of  all  and  the 
supporter of all.  However, they are all the sharir, and their shariri is 
pratyaksha Shree  Krishna Purushottam.    Both  the jad and chaitanya 
prakrutis,   along   with   their   entities   that   have   evolved   in   their 
expanded   and   contracted   states,   dwell   easily   within Bhagvãn.  
Moreover, Bhagvãn dwells within them all as their antaryãmi and as 
their cause.  It is that very Bhagvãn who is pratyaksha.  To know and 
see Bhagvãn with   such   an   understanding   of   greatness   is   called 
perfect gnãn.” 
 
7.20
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “If a person cannot experience the 
greatness  of Bhagvãn in  this  way,  but  does have  a firm  belief  of it  in 
his antah-karans, then can that be said to be perfect gnãn, or not?” 
 
7.21
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “In a dark house, a person can faintly see the 
grain-store  and  the  pillars;  but  due  to  the  darkness,  they  cannot  be 

LOYÃ 
- 337 - 
said  to  have  been  seen  totally.    In  the  same  way,  both  the jad and 
chaitanya prakrutis reside   within Purushottam Bhagvãn,   and   He 
dwells within them as well.  But, if a person experiences this only by 
assumption  and  does  not  actually  see  it,  then  he  cannot  be  said  to 
possess  perfect gnãn.    Nevertheless,  because  he  has  such  a  firm 
nishchay,   he   surely   must   have   experienced   some   sort   of alokik 
powers of Bhagvãn in the past; if not, he will experience them in the 
future. 
 
7.22
 “Despite having such a doubtless nishchay, if  he  does  not  experience 
the alokik powers,  he  should  think, ‘Bhagvãn  possesses  all  those 
powers, but He does not reveal them to me because that is His wish’.  If 
a  person  offers bhakti to Bhagvãn with  such  understanding  and 
remains fulfilled, then he can also be said to possess perfect gnãn. 
 
7.23
 “Therefore, a bhakta with gnãn is  a  person  who  thoroughly  knows 
Bhagvãn through  the indriyas,  the antah-karans,  and  experience.  
Such a bhakta has been praised in the Geetã as the best of all bhaktas: 
  
ãrto jignãsur-arthãrthee gnãnee cha bharatar-shabha 
teshãm gnãnee nitya-yukta eka-bhaktir-vishishyate 
O supreme among the descendants of Bharat (Arjun).  Four types of people 
worship me: a person who is distressed, a person who seeks knowledge of the 
ãtmã, a person who desires material objects, and a person who has gnãn.  Of 
these, the one with gnãn is the best because he is always engaged in me and is 
devoted to me alone. 
 
7.24
 “A bhakta with gnãn,  faithfully  serves pratyaksha  Bhagvãn – who 
eternally  has  a svarup – realising  Him  as  greater  than Prakruti, 
Purush and Akshar, and as being the cause and supporter of all.  This 
understanding  constitutes gnãn;  and  such gnãn leads  to ãtyantik 
moksh.    Those  who  do  not  understand  this,  merely  claim ‘aham-
brahmãsmi’ – I  am  brahm – from  the shãstras.    They  proclaim, ‘I am 
the   svarup   of   brahm,   and   Ram   and   Krishna   are   merely   avatãrs 
originating from me’.  Such blasphemous and unorthodox vedãntis of 

LOYÃ 
- 338 - 
today are extremely evil and great sinners.  At death, they are sent to 
Narak, and they will never be released from there.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Loyã || 7 || 115 || 
 
 
Loyã – 8 
Hyperactive Indriyas 
 
8.1
 In   the Samvat year   1877,   on   the   night  of Mãgshar   sud 5   [10
th
 
December,  1820],  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  in  Surã  Khãchar’s 
darbãr in  Loyã.    He  was  wearing  a  white khes and  had tied  a  white 
feto around  His  head.    He  was  also  wearing  a  white dagli made  of 
chhint.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various 
places, had gathered before Him. 
 
8.2
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked Shreeji Mahãrãj, “On seeing some 
inappropriate svabhãv of  a sãdhu,  a  person  who  is  thoughtless  may 
perceive avgun in  the sãdhu.    But,  why  does  a  person  who  is  wise 
perceive avgun in the sãdhu?” 
 
8.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If a person is wise and has noticed an 
inappropriate svabhãv within himself, has a hatred towards it, and is 
continually  acting  to overcome  that svabhãv,  then when  he  sees  that 
very  same svabhãv in  another sãdhu,  he  develops  a  dislike  towards 
that sãdhu.    On  the  other  hand,  a  fool  does  not  overcome  his  own 
svabhãvs,  and  when  he  sees  that  same svabhãv in  another sãdhu,  he 
perceives avgun in that sãdhu.  Such a person should be considered a 
fool.” 
 
8.4
 Then,   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   gathered   the   junior paramhans,   and   He 
Himself asked and answered questions. 
 
8.5
 First, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “The intensity and mildness of the force 
of kãm, krodh, lobh,  and  other  enemies is  due  to  the  phases  of 

LOYÃ 
- 339 - 
childhood,  youth,  and  old  age.    In  childhood  the  force  is  weak;  in 
youth,  the  force  in  intense;  then  in  old  age  the  force becomes  weak 
again.  Therefore, the intensity and mildness of the inner enemies can 
be noticed; but can they be weakened by any thought process?” 
 
8.6
 Shreeji Mahãrãj Himself replied, “The force of the enemies can be 
weakened by a thought process, which is as follows:  The mildness of 
those svabhãvs  in  childhood,  their  greater  intensity  in  youth,  the 
mildness  once  again  in  old  age,  is  due  to  food.    Specifically,  in 
childhood,  since  the  dietary  intake  is  small,  the  force  of kãm is mild.  
Similarly,  in  old  age,  a  person  dietary  intake  is  small,  so  again  the 
force  of kãm is  mild.    But  in  youth,  as  the  dietary  intake  increases, 
kãm also increases.  Therefore, in youth, if a person’s food intake is 
decreased,   and   if   he   deliberately   tolerates   cold,   heat,   rain,   and 
hunger,   then   by   maintaining   such   a   thought   process,   and   by 
maintaining profound association with a great sant, the force of kãm 
is weakened – even in the period of youth.” 
 
8.7
 Again,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked,  “People  become  addicted  to  many 
different   types of   substances,   like bhãng,   cannabis,   opium,   and 
alcohol.    Are  these  addictions  due  to  a  person’s kriyamãn or 
prãrabdha karmas?” 
 
8.8
 Replying, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “These addictions are developed not 
by prãrabdha, but by habit.  Therefore, if a person maintains courage, 
keeps shraddhã, and is determined to defeat the addiction, then it can 
be  overcome.    But,  if  he  has  no shraddhã and  is  cowardly,  then  that 
addiction cannot be overcome.” 
 
8.9
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Some children have a mature nature 
like elder people, whereas some have an extremely fidgety nature.  Is 
that nature due to company, or is it inherent within the jeev?” 
 
8.10
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “For the most part, a good or bad nature is 
due  to  the  company  kept by  a  person;  but in  some cases,  it  is  due  to 
past karmas.” 

LOYÃ 
- 340 - 
8.11
 Then, Kapileshvarãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, how can a person 
recognise  a svabhãv which  has  formed  in  a  past  life,  and  how  can  he 
recognise a svabhãv which has formed in this life?” 
 
8.12
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A recently formed svabhãv is  overcome  by 
staying in the company of a devout sãdhu and by making a little effort 
to eradicate it.  Just as grass growing on a wall dries up when there is 
no  rain  for  five  days,  similarly,  a  recently  formed svabhãv can  be 
overcome in a few days.  However, a svabhãv that has remained for a 
long  time  is  difficult  to  overcome,  even  after  great  effort  is  made  to 
eradicate it.  For example, if there are strong weeds or a bordi tree in 
the soil, then even if they are set on fire and burnt by a farmer, they 
will still grow.  However, if a person uses a hoe to uproot them from 
their roots, they can be removed.  Similarly, if a person remains in the 
company  of  a  devout sãdhu and  persists  with  great  effort,  even  an 
established svabhãv can be overcome; but only with great effort.” 
 
8.13
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked,  “For  a  person  whose indriyas are 
hyperactive,   what   are   the   individual   methods   by   which   that 
hyperactivity can be overcome?” 
 
8.14
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “To overcome the hyperactivity of the eyes, a 
person  should  fix  his  gaze  on  the  tip  of  his  and  nose  and  not  look 
elsewhere.    While  studying,  he  should  also  engage in bhajan and 
smaran.    While  doing  this,  if  he  continues  to  keep  his  eyes  open 
without blinking for half an hour or so – until his eyes begin to burn 
intensely  and  tears  flow – and  he  does  not  hold  a  improper  thought 
even  if  he  happens  to  notice  a  woman  or  other  objects,  then  even  if 
his eyes are hyperactive, they will become controlled. 
 
8.15
 “The nose does not like the odours coming from someone’s body, 
mouth, or clothes.  At that time, a person should think, ‘My own body 
appears  attractive  superficially,  but  it  is  filled  with  blood,  flesh,  and 
bones; and in the abdomen there are faeces, urine, and the intestines’.  
If he thinks in this way, the hyperactivity of the nose is eradicated. 

LOYÃ 
- 341 - 
8.16
 “The hyperactivity of the ears can be eradicated as follows:  When  a 
person  hears  some  humorous  talks  or  gossip,  he  develops  a  keen 
interest  to  listen  to  them;  whereas,  while  listening to  the kathãs and 
kirtans related to Bhagvãn, he falls asleep.  In that situation, a person 
should  rise  and  suppress  sleep  and  laziness.  He  should  also  keep 
faith  in  and  maintain  a  keen  interest  in  listening  to  the kathãs of 
Bhagvãn.  The ears can be controlled in this way. 
 
8.17
 “The sense of touch can be controlled by deliberately tolerating the 
cold, heat, and rain; by lying down anywhere; by keeping a blanket as 
a pillow and using it for covering the body only when it is very cold.  
Therefore, the skin becomes numb, and the hyperactivity of the sense 
of touch is eradicated. 
 
8.18
 “To overcome the hyperactivity of the hands, a person should keep a 
mãlã in  his  hand  whenever  the  hands  are  idle,  and  turn  it  while 
chanting  the  name  of Bhagvãn in  rhythm  with  the  inhaling  and 
exhaling   of   his   breath.     However,  he  should   not   turn   the mãlã 
hurriedly.    Some  say, ‘A person can chant the name of Bhagvãn  more 
quickly mentally’.  That principle is wrong, as the mind can only chant 
the  name  of Bhagvãn as  many  times  as  the  tongue  can  chant  the 
name  of Bhagvãn.    So,  by  applying  this  method,  the  hyperactivity  of 
the hands is eradicated. 
 
8.19
 “If the legs are hyperactive, they can be controlled by controlling the 
sitting posture. 
 
8.20
 “Hyperactive genitals can be controlled as follows:  When a person 
gets scabies or ringworm, and he scratches himself, the itching is not 
relieved  until  bleeding  occurs.    However,  if  he  does  not  scratch  the 
affected  area,  then  the  itching  decreases  by  itself.   Therefore,  even if 
an itching sensation arises on the genitals, it should not be scratched.  
Moreover,  in  the  case  of  it  becoming  frequently  excited,  if  a  person 
decreases his diet, does upvãs, and physically weakens the body, then 
the genitals can be controlled. 

LOYÃ 
- 342 - 
8.21
 “To conquer the tongue, it should not be given items that it likes, and 
the  diet  should  be  restricted.    In  this  way,  the  hyperactivity  of  the 
tongue is eradicated.   
 
8.22
 “Finally, the hyperactivity of a person’s speech can be eradicated by 
not  interrupting  with  wise  remarks  when  people  like  Muktãnand 
Swãmi  are  speaking  or  narrating  from  the shãstras.    Moreover,  if  a 
person  does  happen  to  interrupt,  he  should  turn  a mãlã twenty-five 
times.      By   this   method,   the   hyperactivity   of   speech   can   be 
eradicated.” 
 
8.23
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Of all these indriyas, which one, if fully 
controlled, leads to control over all the other indriyas?” 
 
8.24
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj answered His own question, “If the tongue is fully 
suppressed, then all the other indriyas can be suppressed.” 
 
8.25
 Again, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “If kãm pervades a person’s heart, and 
even though his genitals are covered by his clothes, how can a person 
realise that he has been pervaded by kãm?” 
 
8.26
 Shreeji Mahãrãj Himself replied, “When kãm pervades  a  person,  his 
eyes, and all of his other indriyas become hyperactive.  In this way, a 
person can realise that he has become overwhelmed by kãm.” 
 
8.27
 Once again, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “A person who has a hyperactive 
nature  should  become  calm,  and  a  person  who  has  a  calm  nature 
should   become   active.      By   which   thought   process   can   this   be 
achieved?” 
 
8.28
 Shreeji Mahãrãj Himself replied, “If a person who is  hyperactive 
thinks, ‘I am the ãtmã, brahm, genderless, and stable like ãkãsh’,  and 
he attains the upsham state through such thoughts, then he becomes 
calm.  If a person who is calm wishes to become more active, then he 
should  realise  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas.    When  he 
realises  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn,  he  engages  in  the  nine  forms  of 

LOYÃ 
- 343 - 
bhakti,  and  performs  basic  service  of  the bhaktas of Bhagvãn.    As  a 
result of this, his nature becomes more active.” 
 
8.29
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Is there anything in the eight shãstras, 
such  as  the  Shreemad  Bhãgvat,  which  should  be  ignored,  or  should 
everything be remembered?” 
 
8.30
 Replying to His own question, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “In all of those 
shãstras there   are countless charitras,   and   through   all   of   those 
charitras,  the  strengths  of  the bhaktas who  have  attained Bhagvãn 
are  described.    Therefore,  they  are  all  suitable  to  be  remembered.  
However, among all these charitras, only those charitras that match a 
person’s own strengths should be remembered.  The others may be 
ignored  with  the  following  understanding: ‘These talks are true, but 
they are for the benefit of other bhaktas; they are not for me’.’’ 
 
8.31
 Once more, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “All of you youngsters  are  seated 
here;  and  from  amongst  you,  all  the sãdhus  praise  some  and  do  not 
praise  others.    Now,  all  of  you  are  of  a  similar  age  and  all  have  the 
same company.  In fact, you all have the same food, clothing, upãsanã, 
shãstras, and mantra, and all listen to the same talks.  So, what is the 
reason for the difference in levels amongst you?  Moreover, he who is 
a sãdhu,   follows dharma completely,   is   unbiased,   and   views   all 
equally; therefore, he would describe everyone as they truly are.  So, 
please answer the question.” 
 
8.32
 Again,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  provided  the  answer,  “Only  he  who  has 
shraddhã is  praised  by  a sãdhu;  and  that  is  also  why  he  follows 
dharma more strictly.  Also, he has shraddhã in serving a sant, and in 
listening  to  the  talks  of Bhagvãn.    He  also  has  faith  in  the sant.  
Therefore,  he  has  progressed.    On  the  other  hand,  he  who  has  not 
progressed,  despite  staying  in  such  company,  should  be  known  to 
lack shraddhã.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Loyã || 8 || 116 || 
 

LOYÃ 
- 344 - 
Loyã – 9 
Development Of Dharma, Gnãn, Vairãgya, And Bhakti 
 
9.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Mãgshar  sud 6  [11
th
 December,  1820], 
Shreeji Mahãrãj was sitting in Surã Khãchar’s darbãr in Loyã.  He was 
wearing a white dagli made of chhint, and a white survãl.  He had also 
tied  a  white feto around His head.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
9.2
 Then,  Shreeji Mahãrãj  requested, “May all  the paramhans please 
engage in a question-answer discussion amongst themselves.” 
 
9.3
 Ãtmãnand Swãmi then asked Akhandãnand Swãmi, “What are the 
factors  that  lead  to  the  development  of vairãgya, gnãn, bhakti,  and 
dharma?” 
 
9.4
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “Vairãgya is  developed  when  a  person 
comes  to  understand  the  nature  of Kãl.    What  is  this nature  of Kãl?  
Well, it  is  to  know  the  process of nitya-pralay, nimit-pralay, prãkrut-
pralay,  and ãtyantik-pralay,  as  well as  the  lifespan  of  all  beings  from 
Brahmã to the smallest blade of grass.  After knowing this, if a person 
understands  the  body,  the brahmãnd,  and  all  other  objects  to  be 
subject to the force of Kãl, then vairãgya would arise. 
 
9.5
 “Gnãn arises  if  a  person  listens  to  the  Upanishads,  such  as  the 
Bruhadãranya   Upanishad,   Chhãndogya   Upanishad,   and   Kathvalli 
Upanishad,  the  Bhagvad  Geetã,  the  Vãsudev  Mahãtmya,  the  Vyãs 
Sutras, and other shãstras from a sat-purush. 
 
9.6
 “Dharma arises  if  a  person  listens  to  the  Yãgnavalkya  Smruti,  Manu 
Smruti,  Parãshar  Smruti,  Shankh-Likhit Smruti,  and  other  Smrutis.  
By  doing  so, dharma will  arise,  and  a  person  will  develop  belief  in 
those shãstras. 
 

LOYÃ 
- 345 - 
9.7
 “Bhakti arises  if  a  person  understands  the avatãrs of Bhagvãn.    How 
should he understand them?  Well, when he hears about the murti of 
Bhagvãn that are in each khand; and when he hears about the dhãms 
of Bhagvãn – Golok, Vaikunth, Brahmpur, Shvet-Dvip;  and  when  he 
listens with a sense of admiration to the talks of the leelãs of Bhagvãn 
describing  the creation, sustenance, and  destruction  of  the universe; 
and  when  he  listens  with  keen  interest  to  the  narration  of  the leelãs 
of Rãm, Krishna,  and  the  other avatãrs of Bhagvãn,  then bhakti 
towards Bhagvãn would develop. 
 
9.8
 “Now, even though a person in his initial stages has an immature 
mind, if he listens to the ceremonial Smrutis, dharma would develop.  
Later,  after  becoming  firm  in  his  observance  of dharma,  if  he  listens 
to shãstras that  explain upãsanã,  then  all  three  (gnãn, bhakti,  and 
vairãgya)  would  develop.    These  are  the  factors  which  lead  to  the 
development of the four qualities.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Loyã || 9 || 117 || 
 
 
Loyã – 10 
Remaining Without Moh 
 
10.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on  the  morning  of Mãgshar  sud 8  [13
th
 
December,   1820],   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated 
bedstead in Surã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Loyã.  He was wearing a white 
dagli made  of chhint and  white survãl.    He  had  also  tied  a  white feto 
around  His  head.    A sabhã of munis,  as well  as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
10.2
 Then, Nityãnand Swãmi said, “In this world, there are some men who 
have  such  love  for  women  and  other  objects,  that  if  they  were  to  be 
separated, they would not be able to live.  There are others who have 
love for women and other objects, but it is not as intense.  So, if they 

LOYÃ 
- 346 - 
were to be separated, they would survive.  In this way, there are two 
types of people.  Now, if the first type of person, who involves himself 
in  worldly  life  with  love,  were  to  meet Bhagvãn,  he  would  become 
attached to Bhagvãn in the same way; if he were to be separated from 
Bhagvãn,  he  would  not  be  able  to  survive.    Moreover,  if  the  second 
person,  with  less  love  for  worldly  life,  were  to  meet Bhagvãn,  he 
would have  less  love  for Bhagvãn as  well.   Is  the difference  between 
these two types of people due to karmas, or is it eternal?” 
 
10.3
 Hearing  this, Shreeji Mahãrãj  replied, “Those differences  are  not 
inherently  present  in  the jeev;  instead,  they  arise  as  a  result of 
karmas.  How does this happen?  Well, when a jeev performs a karma, 
the  force  of  its vruttis can  be  of  three  levels:    mild,  medium,  and 
intense.    The  force  with  which  the vruttis attach  themselves  to  the 
object, determines the effect of the karma upon the jeev.  As a result, 
three levels of love arise due to these karmas.” 
 
10.4
 Again, Nityãnand Swãmi asked, “Do the three levels in the force of the 
vruttis occur as a result of the gun, or is there some other reason?” 
 
10.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The three types of differences are not due to 
the gun;  to  be  more  precise,  when  only  the indriyas indulge  in  an 
object,  then  a  mild  force  results.    When  the indriyas indulge  in  an 
object along with the mind, a medium force develops.  When all three 
– the indriyas,  the  mind,  and  the jeev – combine  and  indulge  in  an 
object, the vruttis develop an intense force.  Even if that intense force 
affects  only  the  eyes,  the  other indriyas would  follow,  and  the  force 
would affect them as well.  In this way, whichever indriya is primarily 
affected  by  the  intense  force,  the  other indriyas follow.    Moreover, 
that intense force affects all three types of people – rãjasi, sãttvik, and 
tãmasi.    In  fact,  such  intense  force  is  present  in  each  of  the indriyas; 
therefore, love for objects arises.” 
 
10.6
 Then, Nityãnand Swãmi asked, “Why does he not develop love for 
Bhagvãn with such an intense force?” 

LOYÃ 
- 347 - 
10.7
 Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Good and bad behaviour is determined by the 
factors  of desh, kãl, kriyã, dhyãn, shãstras, dikshã, mantra,  and sang.  
So,  if  a  person  attains  pleasant  factors,  then  he  develops  love  for 
Bhagvãn quickly.    But,  if  he  encounters  unpleasant  factors,  then  he 
would develop love for objects other than Bhagvãn.” 
 
10.8
 Then,  Chaitanyãnand  Swãmi asked, “What should a person do in 
difficult times?” 
 
10.9
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Whenever and wherever times are difficult, 
a  person  should  abandon  that  place  for  another  location;  he  should 
not  stay  where  the  factor  of kãl is  unpleasant.    In  actual  fact, kãl,  in 
the  form  of Satya-Yug, Tretã-Yug, Dvãpar-Yug,  and Kali-Yug,  exists 
both externally and internally.  So, when Kali-Yug is prevalent within 
a person’s heart, he should not visualise the murti of Bhagvãn within 
his heart; instead, it should be seen externally, before his eyes.” 
 
10.10
 Then,  Muktãnand  Swãmi  asked,  “How  can  a  person  distinguish 
whether   a   mild,   a   medium,   or   an   intense   force   prevails   within 
someone’s heart?” 
   
10.11
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied, “When the force is mild, a person would 
have the same feelings on seeing a young girl, a young woman, or an 
old  woman.    This  is  because  only  the vruttis of  the indriyas have 
become involved.  As a result, a mild force has developed.  When the 
mind unites with the indriyas and they see the three types of women, 
then  no  improper  thoughts  arise  towards  the  young  girl  or  the  old 
woman;  but  indecent  thoughts  certainly  do  arise  towards  the  young 
woman, and a disturbance is experienced.  This should be known as a 
medium level force.  When both the mind and the jeev combine with 
the indriyas and  look  at  the  three  types  of  women,  then  improper 
thoughts arise towards all three types of women, and a disturbance is 
experienced.    In  fact,  a  person  would  experience  such  improper 

LOYÃ 
- 348 - 
thoughts  even  on  seeing  his  own  mother  or  sister.    This  should  be 
known as an intense force.” 
 
10.12
 Then, Brahmãnand  Swãmi  asked,  “Suppose  a  person  notices  the 
distinction  between  the  three  types  of  women,  and  notices  their 
beauty   and   ugliness,   yet   he   does   not   experience   any   improper 
thoughts.  Which type of force is that?” 
 
10.13
 Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Having realised an object to be the cause of 
intense  misery  and  having  reflected  upon  that  fact,  a  person  assigns 
serious flaws to that object.  The reflection of those disadvantages in 
the  mind  then  leads  to  those  flaws  being  acknowledged  by  the jeev.  
The  witness  (Bhagvãn),  who  is  greater  than  the jeev,  also  confirms 
those   flaws,   and   so   an   extremely   firm   belief   in   those   flaws   is 
developed.    Therefore,  when  the vruttis of  the indriyas enter  the 
object, the mind and jeev also go along with the vruttis; but since the 
jeev’s deep  belief  of  the  flaw  in  the  object  pierces  the  mind  and 
indriyas,  even  though  the  object  is  seen  and  fully  recognised,  an 
intense hatred still arises for it.  For example, if a snake’s venom is 
dropped  into  a  bowl  of  sweet  milk,  and  a  person  sees  the  venom 
being added, then even though the milk appears exactly as before, an 
intense  hatred  for  it  prevails  in  his  heart.    This  is  because  he  has 
realised, ‘If I drink the milk, I will die’.    Similarly,  such  a  person  has 
realised, ‘This beautiful woman is an obstacle on the path of kalyãn; 
and she is the cause of extreme misery in this lok and in the higher loks.  
In  fact,  I  have  attained  the  company  of  women countless  times  in  past 
lives  in  various  life-forms,  and  if  I  still  do  not  worship  Bhagvãn,  I  will 
attain   the   company   of   countless   more   females.      Therefore,   this 
attainment is not rare.  However, the company of Bhagvãn and His sant 
is extremely rare, and this woman is a major obstacle in the attainment 
of that’.  A person who has realised this and has intensely realised the 
flaws  in  the  object,  will  never  be  infatuated  on  seeing  a  woman, 
regardless of how beautiful she may be. 
 

LOYÃ 
- 349 - 
10.14
 “Furthermore, there is another way to remain free of infatuation:  
Janak  the  Videhi,  who  was  a  great  king  and  a bhakta of Bhagvãn, 
stayed in his kingdom and, due to his firmness in gnãn, remained free 
of  infatuation  even  while indulging  in  attractive vishays.    Similarly,  a 
bhakta with gnãn like  Janak,  has  the  thought, ‘I am the ãtmã – pure, 
chaitanya,  unchanging,  blissful,  and  imperishable.    However,  vishays 
like  women  and  other  objects,  are  full  of  misery;  they  are  worthless, 
perishable, and jad’.  With this thought, he believes only his own self, 
the ãtmã, as being blissful.  Also, he believes, ‘The pleasure and charm 
which  are  apparent  in  the  vishays  are  only  experienced  due  to  the 
ãtmã.    But,  when  the  ãtmã  leaves  the  body,  that  which  was  once 
pleasurable becomes miserable’.  He  reflects  upon  his ãtmã in  this 
way. 
 
10.15
 “He also reflects upon Paramãtmã,  who  is  greater  than  the ãtmã,  as 
follows:   ‘I have attained this gnãn of the pure ãtmã, which is greater 
than mãyã, by the grace of the sant.  That sant is a bhakta of Bhagvãn.  
Moreover, that Bhagvãn is the ãtmã of even brahm, who is ãtmã of all.  
He is the ãtmã of Akshar, and is also the ãtmã of the countless millions 
of  muktas.    I  am  the  brahm-rup  dãs  of  that  Parbrahm  Purushottam 
Nãrãyan’. 
 
10.16
 “Also, he understands the greatness of Bhagvãn by realising: 
 
dyupataya eva ten a yayur-antam anantatayã 
tvamapi yad-antarãnda-nichayã nanu sãvaranãhã 
Even the masters of the higher loks cannot understand your greatness, 
because it is endless.  Neither can you yourself understand your own greatness.  
In your each and every hair, countless brahmãnds and their barriers (jad 
prakruti) fly simultaneously at immense speed – like specks of dust flying in 
the air.  Even the Shrutis, ultimately perish in you, and fail to praise your glory. 
 
“Such shloks have greatly explained the greatness of Bhagvãn.   
 
10.17
 “When a person, who has gnãn of his own self and of Bhagvãn, attains 
a vishay, his mind would not even be slightly affected by it, regardless 

LOYÃ 
- 350 - 
of  how  appealing  it  may  be.    He  indulges  in  the  essential vishays 
without  becoming  dependent  upon  them.    Instead,  he  indulges  in 
them  independently  of  his  own  accord.    Just  as  a  spider  spreads  its 
own web and then it independently retracts it when necessary, in the 
same   way,   a bhakta possessing gnãn engages   the vruttis of   his 
indriyas in  the vishays and  retracts  them  on  his  own  accord.    Such  a 
person feels as if he is in the forest, even if he is amongst people; and 
though he may be in the forest, he experiences more happiness there 
than a person does from ruling a kingdom. 
 
10.18
 “The bhakta may  reside  in  a  kingdom,  thousands  of  people  may  be 
under his command, and he may be wealthy; but he himself does not 
feel, ‘I have become very great’.    Furthermore,  if  the  kingdom  is 
destroyed and he begs for food from house to house with a clay bowl, 
he  does  not  feel, ‘Now I have become poor’.    This  is  because  he 
remains  absolutely  carefree  in  his  own  bliss,  and  he  knows  the 
greatness  of  his  own  self  and  that  of Bhagvãn.    Therefore,  he  views 
gold,  dirt,  iron,  and  stones  as  equal;  he  also  feels  calmness  in  praise 
and  insult.    Since  his  vision  has  become  broad,  and  he  knows  all 
worldly  objects  to  be  worthless,  no  objects  are  capable  of  binding  a 
person  with gnãn.   For  example,  when a  man  who was initially  poor 
receives  a  kingdom, his  vision  becomes  broad.   At first,  he may have 
been  selling  bundles  of  wood  or  doing  various  other  insignificant 
jobs,  but  he  forgets  them  all  and  he  begins  to  do  important  tasks 
related  to  his  kingdom.    Similarly, to  a  person  with gnãn,  all  objects 
become worthless; and due to that gnãn, his vision becomes broad.  A 
person with such an understanding becomes happy. 
 
10.19
 “Also, if a person has faith, and he believes, ‘Whatever such a great 
sant and Bhagvãn say is the truth; there is no doubt in it’, and with this 
belief he  does  as Bhagvãn and  His sant instruct  him  to  do,  then  that 
person  remains  happy.    These  are  the  two  types  of  people  who  are 
happy; apart from them, everyone is unhappy.  This is also described 
in the following shlok:  

LOYÃ 
- 351 - 
yash-cha mudhatamo loke yash-cha buddheha param gataha 
tãvubho sukham-edhete klishya-tyantarito janaha 
In this world, there are two types of people who experience the bliss of 
Bhagvãn:  those who are utterly ignorant and have blind faith in Bhagvãn, and 
those who are perfectly enlightened and have realised Bhagvãn.  Those who 
are in between, are troubled. 
 
10.20
 “Also, in the Bhagvad Geetã, it is said: 
 
vishayã vinivar-tante nirãhãrasya dehinaha 
rasa-varjam rasopyasya param drushtva nivartate 
The sense objects recede for a person who refrains from indulging in them.  
However, the longing for them does not subside.  The longing subsides only 
when his vision reaches Bhagvãn. 
 
“This means that all  objects,  except Bhagvãn,  become  worthless  to  a 
person  whose  vision  becomes alokik in  this  way.    Moreover,  the 
meaning of these two shloks is the same.” 
 
10.21
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi said, “Mahãrãj, now please ask the question 
you were going to ask.” 
 
10.22
 So, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Is there only  misery  in mãyã,  or  is  there 
also some happiness in it?  That is the question.” 
 
10.23
 Muktãnand Swãmi replied, “Mãyã causes only misery.” 
 
10.24
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Of the three gun – sattva-gun, rajo-gun, 
and tamo-gun – which  arise  from Mãyã, sattva-gun is  said  to  give 
happiness.  Furthermore, in the Shreemad Bhãgvat it is said: 
 
sattvam yad-brahma-darshanam 
Sattva-gun leads to the vision of Bhagvãn. 
 
“It is also said that the products of sattva-gun are gnãn, vairãgya, 
wisdom,  tranquillity,  and  discipline.    How  is mãyã in  this  form  a 
cause of misery?  Furthermore, it is stated in the eleventh skandh: 

LOYÃ 
- 352 - 
vidyavidye mama tanu viddhyud-dhava shareerinam; 
bandha-mokshakari ãdye mãyayã me vinir-mite 
O Uddhav!  Realise my two forms – both of which have been created from my 
mãyã:  the ancient vidya and avidya, which free and bind people respectively. 
 
“So, how is mãyã in  the  form  of  knowledge,  which  leads  to moksh,  a 
cause of misery?” 
 
10.25
 Hearing the question, Muktãnand Swãmi and all the other paramhans 
said, “Mahãrãj, we are unable to answer, so please have mercy, and 
give the answer yourself.” 
 
10.26
 Hearing this, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “To a sinful person, the svarup of 
Yam-Rãj appears  frightful  and  terrible,  with  large  teeth and  a  large, 
frightening  mouth;  he  appears  black  like  soot,  huge  like  a  mountain, 
and  horrific  like  death.    In  this  way,  his svarup appears  dreadful.  
However,  to  a  good  person,  the svarup of Yam-Rãj appears  very 
pleasant,  like Vishnu.    Similarly,  to  those  who  are vimukhs, mãyã 
causes attachment and intense misery, while to a bhakta of Bhagvãn 
that  same mãyã is  the  cause  of  intense  happiness.    Also,  the  entities 
that  have  evolved  out  of Mãyã – the antah-karans,  the indriyas,  and 
their  presiding devs – all support  the bhakti of Bhagvãn.    Therefore, 
for a bhakta of Bhagvãn, mãyã is not a cause of misery; it is a source 
of great happiness.” 
 
10.27
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “If mãyã is a cause of happiness, why 
is  it  that  when  a bhakta of Bhagvãn visualises the murti of Bhagvãn 
and  engages  in  worship, mãyã,  in  the  form  of  the antah-karans, 
causes misery by generating many disturbing thoughts?” 
 
10.28
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Mãyã, in the form of the antah-karans, does 
not   cause   misery   to   a   person   who   thoroughly   understands   the 
greatness  of Bhagvãn and  has  an  absolutely  firm  refuge  of Bhagvãn; 
but  it  does  cause  misery  to  a  person  who  does  not  have  this  refuge.  
For  example,  a kusangi would  attempt  to  dislodge  only a  weak 

LOYÃ 
- 353 - 
satsangi;  but  no  one  would  dare  to  dislodge  a  firm satsangi.    In  fact, 
no  one  would  be  able  to  speak  unkindly  of satsang in  his  presence.  
Similarly, mãyã,   in   the   form   of   the antah-karans,   would   never 
entertain  a  desire  to  intimidate  a  person  who  has  a  firm  refuge  in 
Bhagvãn.    Instead,  it  would  help  his bhakti to  flourish.    However, 
mãyã does  deflect  a  person  who  has  a  slight  deficiency  in  his  refuge 
in Bhagvãn, and does cause him misery.  However, when that person 
develops  a  complete  refuge  in Bhagvãn, mãyã is  not  able  to  disturb 
him or cause him pain.  Therefore, the answer is that if a person has 
complete nishchay in Bhagvãn, mãyã is  not  capable  of  causing  him 
misery.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Loyã || 10 || 118 || 
 
 
Loyã – 11 
 Beliefs Of A Sat And An Asat Person 
 
11.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on  the  morning  of Mãgshar  vad 8  [27
th
 
December,  1820],  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  in 
Surã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Loyã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.    A sabhã of sãdhus,  as  well as haribhaktas from  various 
places, had gathered before Him. 
 
11.2
 Then, Shuk Muni asked Shreeji Mahãrãj, “What understanding does 
an asat-purush adopt   from   the   Shreemad   Bhãgvat,   the   Bhagvad 
Geetã, and other sacred shãstras?” 
   
11.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The answer is as follows:  An asat-purush 
person  believes  that  all  the sthãvar and jangam male  and  female 
svarups in  this  world  have  been  created  through Mãyã and  the 
Purush, Virãt,  and svarup of Bhagvãn.    This  implies  that  all  these 
svarups are  manifestations  of Bhagvãn Himself.    For  this  reason,  a 
person  aspiring  for kalyãn should  initially  conquer  his  mind;  and 

LOYÃ 
- 354 - 
then,  if  his  mind  is  attracted  towards  a  higher  or  lower svarup of 
either  a  male  or  female,  he  should  perform dhyãn upon  that  very 
svarup in   order   to   attain   instantaneous samãdhi.      If   the   mind 
perceives any flaws in that svarup, then he should believe that svarup 
to be brahm by thinking, ‘The whole world is brahm’.  Thinking in this 
way, he should disprove the perception of those flaws.  In this way, to 
accept only the words regarding experiences from the shãstras is the 
understanding  of  an asat-purush.    Such  a  misunderstanding  reflects 
the wicked nature of his mind, and at the end of his life, he is sent to 
the deep regions of Narak and the cycle of births and deaths.” 
 
11.4
 Then,  Shuk  Muni  requested,  “Now,  please  explain  what 
understanding a sat-purush person adopts from the sacred shãstras.” 
 
11.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “The answer to this question is given in 
the  sacred shãstras themselves.    Specifically,  those  desiring kalyãn 
should not perform dhyãn upon – with the exception of Purushottam 
Nãrãyan – any devs,  such  as Shiv and Brahmã.    Instead,  among  all 
humans and devs, they should perform dhyãn only upon murtis, such 
as Rãm and Krishna,  which  are avatãrs of Purushottam Nãrãyan.  
Furthermore,   the   wise bhaktas consider   all   the   places   where 
Bhagvãn’s murti of Rãm and Krishna reside  to  be Vaikunth, Golok, 
Shvet-Dvip, and Brahmpur.  They consider the pãrshads that dwell in 
those loks to  be  the pãrshads of Rãm and Krishna,  such  as Hanumãn 
and Uddhav. 
 
11.6
 “They also regard the divya murtis  of Bhagvãn in  those loks,  which 
are  radiant  with  the  light  of  countless  millions  of  suns,  moons,  and 
flames of fire, to be murtis of avatars such as Rãm and Krishna in their 
dhãms.  Therefore, a person who adopts such an understanding from 
the  sacred shãstras,  and  performs dhyãn on  the  human svarup of 
Bhagvãn with   a  sense  of   divinity,   never   equates   the svarups of 
Bhagvãn’s avatãrs and   other svarups.      In   reality,   all murtis   of 
Bhagvãn’s avatãrs have only two arms.  However, for the sole reason 

LOYÃ 
- 355 - 
of   dismissing   any   similarity   that   a   person   lacking   wisdom   may 
perceive between Bhagvãn’s svarup and other svarups, they are often 
described as having four arms or eight arms. 
 
11.7
 “Moreover, a person should only perform dhyãn on  the murti of 
Bhagvãn that  he  has  attained,  not  on  the murtis  of  the  previous 
avatãrs.    Therefore,  like  a  woman  who  keeps  the  vow  of  fidelity,  a 
person should remain totally faithful to the murti of Bhagvãn that he 
has attained.  Pãrvati has also said,  
 
koti janma-laga ragad hamãri; varu Shambhu, ke rahu kumãri 
For a million lives I have done so; I’ll marry Shambhu, or remain unwed.  
 
“Such a vow of fidelity has  also  been  mentioned  in  order  to  dismiss 
the  similarity  that  a  person  lacking  wisdom  perceives  between  the 
svarup of Bhagvãn and  other  beings.    This  is  because  if  someone 
strays from the murti of Bhagvãn which he has attained, and instead 
performs dhyãn on  the  previous avatãrs of  that  very Bhagvãn,  then 
he  may  later  even  abandon Bhagvãn and  perform dhyãn upon  other 
devs of other human svarups.  That is why the vow of fidelity has been 
mentioned, not because there is any difference between the murtis of 
Bhagvãn themselves.    This  is  the  understanding  of  a sat-purush.  
Therefore, a person should only hear the sacred shãstras from a sat-
purush person, but never from an asat-purush.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Loyã || 11 || 119 || 
 
 
Loyã – 12 
Savikalp And Nirvikalp Nishchay 
 
12.1
 In   the Samvat year   1877,   on   the   night   of Mãgshar   vad 9   [28
th
 
December,  1820],  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  in 
Surã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Loyã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes,  and  was  also  wearing  a  red,  woollen dagli.    A sabhã of 
paramhans, as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered 
before Him. 

LOYÃ 
- 356 - 
12.2
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj raised a question:  “Nishchay in Bhagvãn is  of 
two  types: savikalp nishchay and nirvikalp nishchay.    In  each  type  of 
nishchay there   are   three   sub-categories:    uttam, madhyam,   and 
kanishth.  Please describe the distinguishing characteristics of each of 
these six sub-categories.” 
 
12.3
 The paramhans were unable to answer, so Shreeji  Mahãrãj said, “The 
characteristics of a person with the kanishth savikalp nishchay are as 
follows:  As long as Bhagvãn exhibits kãm, krodh, lobh, mãn, and svãd, 
to  the  same  extent  as  other  humans,  the  person’s nishchay in 
Bhagvãn remains.      However,   if Bhagvãn were   to   display   these 
svabhãvs more so than others, his nishchay would be shattered. 
 
12.4
 “The nishchay of   someone   with   the madhyam savikalp nishchay 
remains  firm  even  if Bhagvãn exhibits kãm and krodh to  a  double 
degree than that of humans. 
 
12.5
 “Finally, a person with the uttam savikalp nishchay would  never 
doubt any action of Bhagvãn, even if Bhagvãn were to behave crudely 
like a person of a low varna and ãshram; or exhibit anger or violence; 
or  indulge  in  drinking  alcohol,  meat-eating,  or  adultery.    This  is 
because  he  understands Bhagvãn to  be  the  all-doer,  the  supreme 
lord,  and  the  experience  of  everything.    Such  a  person  realises  that 
whatever  actions  take  place  in  the  world  are  the  result  of Bhagvãn, 
who  is anvay within  all  beings  as  their  controller.    If  He  were  to 
indulge in some shameful deed, it would not affect Him at all since He 
Himself  is  the  all-doer.    In  this  way,  a  person  who  has  realised 
Bhagvãn as the lord of all, is known as a bhakta of Bhagvãn with the 
uttam savikalp nishchay. 
 
12.6
 “As for a bhakta with the kanishth nirvikalp nishchay, no matter what 
good  or  bad  deeds  he  witnesses  being  performed  by Bhagvãn,  he 
understands  that  in  all  actions Bhagvãn performs,  He  is  still  a  non-
doer, since He is brahm.  That brahm is like ãkãsh; everything resides 
in ãkãsh and all actions take place within it.  The bhakta realises such 
qualities  of brahm of Bhagvãn.    For example,  during  the  narration  of 

LOYÃ 
- 357 - 
the rãs-leelã, Parikshit Rãjã asked Shukji, ‘Bhagvãn assumes an avatãr 
to uphold dharma.  Then, why did He associate with the gopis?’  Shukji 
replied, ‘Shree  Krishna  is  radiant  like  fire;  whatever  actions  He 
performs, good or bad, are burnt to ashes’.  In this way, a person who 
understands Bhagvãn as brahm,  and  unaffected  by  the  actions  He 
performs, is said to have the kanishth nirvikalp nishchay. 
 
12.7
 “A person who becomes like the niranna-muktas of Shvet-Dvip – who 
are  free  from  the shad-urmi (six  physical  and  emotional  feelings) – 
and   worships Vãsudev,   is   said   to   possess   a madhyam nirvikalp 
nishchay. 
 
12.8
 “Finally, a person  possessing  the uttam nirvikalp nishchay realises 
that  countless  millions  of brahmãnds,  each  encircled  by  the  eight 
barriers  (jad  prakruti),  appear  like  mere  atoms  before Akshar.    Such 
is  the  greatness  of Akshar,  the dhãm of Purushottam Nãrãyan.    A 
person  who  worships Purushottam realising  himself  to  be akshar-
rup, can be said to possess the uttam nirvikalp nishchay.”   
 
12.9
 Then, Chaitanyãnand Swãmi  asked,  “Mahãrãj,  how  have  these 
distinctions in nishchay arisen?” 
 
12.10
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “When a mumukshu initially  approaches  a 
guru,   several   factors   cause   distinctions   in   his nishchay:      the 
pleasantness  and  unpleasantness  of desh, kãl, sang, dikshã, kriyã, 
mantra,   and shãstras,   with   regards   to   the guru;   as   well   as   the 
intensity  of  his  own shraddhã.    Therefore,  a  person  should  always 
associate with pleasant desh, kãl, kriyã, and sang.  Moreover, a person 
should acquire wisdom from a speaker who is calm and faultless.” 
 
12.11
 Chaitanyãnand Swãmi asked further, “If under such circumstances a 
person  develops  the kanishth nishchay,  can  it  later  develop  into  the 
uttam nishchay?” 
 

LOYÃ 
- 358 - 
12.12
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If the listener possesses extreme shraddhã; 
and  if  he  encounters  pleasant desh, kãl, kriyã,  and sang;  and  if  he 
encounters a guru with the uttam gnãn, then the highest nishchay will 
develop.  Otherwise, such nishchay would develop after many lives.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Loyã || 12 || 120 || 
 
 
Loyã – 13 
Not Being Overcome By Unpleasant Circumstances 
 
13.1
 In  the  early  morning  of Mãgshar  vad 10  [30
th
 December,  1820], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated 
bedstead in Surã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Loyã.    He  was  wearing  a  red, 
woollen dagli and  a  white khes.    He had  tied  a  white feto around His 
head,  and  had  tied  a bokãni with  another  white feto.    In  addition  to 
this,   He   had   covered   Himself   with   a   white chofãl.      A sabhã of 
paramhans, as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered 
before Him. 
 
13.2
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  told  the  senior paramhans to  ask  questions 
amongst  themselves.    So,  Gopãlãnand  Swãmi  asked Brahmãnand 
Swãmi, “What type of person is overcome by unpleasant desh, kãl, 
kriyã, and sang; and what type of person is not overcome?  After all, it 
is  said  that  even Brahmã was  infatuated  upon  seeing  Sarasvati,  as 
was Shivji when he saw Mohini.  So, please answer carefully, because 
even    such    great devs have    been    overcome    by    unpleasant 
circumstances.” 
 
13.3
 Brahmãnand  Swãmi  attempted  to  answer,  but  could  not  give  an 
adequate reply. 
 
13.4
 So, Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “A person who has withdrawn his 
nãdis and prãns, and by way of his nirvikalp state remains at the holy 

LOYÃ 
- 359 - 
feet  of Bhagvãn,  would  not  be  overcome  by  unpleasant desh, kãl, 
kriyã,  and sang, even  if  he  was  an  insignificant  being.    In  fact,  if 
Brahmã and  other devs behave  in  this  way;  they  would  also  not  be 
overcome.    However,  if  he  has  not  developed  such  a  state,  and 
instead,  behaves  as  if  he  is  the  body,  then  average  beings,  as  well  as 
great devs, would be overcome.  If this were not so, then the meaning 
of the following shlok would not be true: 
 
tat-shrushta-shrushta-shrushteshu konvakhandita-dheehee pumãn 
rushim nãrayanam-rute yoshin-mãyyeha mãyayã 
Of the progeny of Brahmã (Marichi), and their progeny (Kashyap), and their 
progeny (humans and devs) – whose mind in this world, besides that of 
Nãrãyan Rushi, can be distinguished as being unaffected by the mãyã and 
attractive charm of women? 
 
13.5
 “Therefore, Bhagvãn alone   is   not   overcome   by   those  influences.  
While  all  others,  no  matter  how  great  they  may  be,  if  they  are  not 
engrossed  in  the  holy  feet  of Bhagvãn,  would  be  overcome;  those 
who  do  remain  engrossed  are  not  overcome.    This  is  a  universal 
principle that I have firmly established within myself. 
 
13.6
 “Moreover, it is mentioned in the Shreemad Bhãgvat: 
 
etad-eeshanam-eehasya prakrutisthopi tad-gunahee 
na yujyate sadãtmasthair-yathã buddhis-tad-ãshrayã 
Just as a person’s buddhi (knowledge of Bhagvãn) is not affected by the 
characteristics of the body (such as birth, death, age, illness), similarly, 
Bhagvãn, who pervades Prakruti, is forever unaffected by their influences and 
the influences of ãtmãs.  This is the ability of Bhagvãn. 
 
13.7
 “Krishna Bhagvãn has also said: 
 
daivee hyeshã guna-mayee mama mãyã duratyayã 
mãm-eva ye prapadyante mãyãm-etam taranti te 
My mãyã, which I have created and is composed of the three gun, is indeed 
difficult to rise above.  However, those who take refuge in me alone can rise 
above that mãyã. 

LOYÃ 
- 360 - 
13.8
 “Therefore, only Bhagvãn remains unaffected by mãyã; and a person 
who   has   realised Bhagvãn through   a nirvikalp state   is   also   not 
overcome  by mãyã.    On  the  other  hand,  someone  who  has  realised 
Bhagvãn through a savikalp state would still be overcome, no matter 
how great he may be.” 
 
13.9
 Then,  Nityãnand  Swãmi  asked,  “Mahãrãj,  as  long  as  a mukta is 
associated  with  the  three gun (sattva-gun, rajo-gun, tamo-gun),  he is 
affected  by desh, kãl, kriyã,  and sang.    However,  it  is  accepted  that 
Bhagvãn is  not  influenced  by desh, kãl, kriyã,  and sang – even  while 
He  remains  with  the gun.    However,  when  all  the muktas are  free 
from the association of the gun, and have become nirgun, they dwell 
in Akshardhãm along  with Bhagvãn – who  dwells  there  in  the  same 
way; and all the muktas are nirgun, and composed of chaitanya.  Also, 
as  explained  by ‘mama sãdharmya-mãgatãha’,  they  have  attained 
qualities   similar   to   those   of Bhagvãn.      Then,   how   should   we 
understand the distinction between the muktas and Bhagvãn?” 
 
13.10
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “Look at the moon and the stars.  Is there 
not  a  difference  between  the  two?    They  are  not  similar  in  terms  of 
brightness,  and  there  is  a  vast  difference  between  the  intensity  of 
their  rays.    All the  herbs  are  nourished  by  the  moon,  but  not  by  the 
stars.    Also, it  is  the moon  that  dispels  the  darkness  of  the  night,  not 
the stars.  Bhagvãn and the muktas differ in the same way. 
 
13.11
 “Also, a king and his servant are both the same, as they both are 
humans; yet the authority, power, beauty, and charm of the king are 
far  more  superior.    His  servant,  regardless  of  how  great  he  may  be, 
cannot   achieve   what   the   king   can   achieve.      In   the   same   way, 
Purushottam Nãrãyan is the all-doer, the cause of all, the controller of 
all;  He  is  extremely  attractive,  extremely  radiant,  and  extremely 
powerful;  also,  He  possesses kartum, akartum,  and anyathã-kartum  
powers.    If  He  wishes,  He  can  conceal  all  the muktas of Akshardhãm 
by His own divine light and prevail alone.  Also, if He wishes, He can 

LOYÃ 
- 361 - 
accept the bhakti of the muktas and reside with them.  He can conceal 
even Akshar,  in  the svarup of Akshardhãm,  in  which  He  dwells,  and 
preside  alone.    If  He  so  chooses,  He  is  capable  of  supporting  the 
countless muktas by    His    own    power,    without    even    needing 
Akshardhãm.    For  example, Pruthu Bhagvãn told Pruthvi, ‘I can kill 
you with the arrow from my bow and still be able to support the whole 
world by my powers’.  Likewise,  through  His  powers, Bhagvãn reigns 
as the supreme lord.  A person who equates Bhagvãn with Akshar and 
the  other muktas should  be  regarded  as  evil-minded  and  as  a  great 
sinner.    A  person  should  avoid  even  looking  at  him.    In  fact,  merely 
looking at such a person is as sinful as committing the five great sins. 
 
13.12
 “Of  course,  by  considering  their  association  with Bhagvãn,   it   is 
acceptable to grant greatness upon anyone.  Brahmã, Shiv, Nãrad, the 
Sanakãdik,  and  Uddhav  can  all  be  called Bhagvãn because  of  their 
association  with Bhagvãn.    At  present,  even  a sãdhu like  Muktãnand 
Swãmi   can   be   considered   to   be   like Bhagvãn because   of   his 
association  with Bhagvãn.    However,  without Bhagvãn,  even Akshar 
cannot be called Bhagvãn – let alone anyone else. 
 
13.13
 “This Vedic shlok reflects the same truth: 
 
aparimitã dhurvãs-tanubhruto yadi sarvagatãs-tarhi 
na shãsyateti niyamo dhruva netarathã 
O loyal Bhagvãn!  If the embodied jeevs, which are innumerable and eternal, 
are believed to be all-pervasive, then they would not be governable.  Not 
believing them as all-pervasive would not cause any discrepancies. 
 
“If this were not so, then why would we – despite regarding ourselves 
to  be brahm-rup,  and  distinct  from  the  body,  and  possessing gnãn 
and vairãgya – try  to  please Bhagvãn by  staying  up  day  and  night, 
clapping, singing kirtans, and chanting His holy name tirelessly?  Why 
would  we  engage  in kathãs  and  talks  day  and  night,  and  encourage 
others  to  do  so  as  well?    Why  would  we  make  so  much  effort  if  we 
could   become   like Bhagvãn?      Therefore,   only Bhagvãn is   like 

LOYÃ 
- 362 - 
Bhagvãn;  no  one  can  become  like  Him.    The  Vedic shlok ‘ekam-
evãdviteeyam  brahm’ also   explains   that Bhagvãn alone   is   like 
Bhagvãn.  This is the principle of all the shãstras.” 
 
13.14
 In  this  way,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  addressed  the bhaktas for  their  benefit, 
when in reality He Himself is Purushottam Nãrãyan. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Loyã || 13 || 121 || 
 
 
Loyã – 14 
Personal Preference Of Shreeji Mahãrãj 
 
14.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Mãgshar  vad 11  [31
st
 December,  1820], 
Shreeji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated   bedstead   in   Surã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in Loyã.  He was wearing a white khes, and had tied 
a  white feto around  His  head.    He  had  covered  Himself  with  a  white 
chãdar.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various 
places, had gathered before Him. 
 
14.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said to the paramhans, “All the ãchãryas of the 
past  have  had  differing  beliefs.    Of  them,  Shankar  Swãmi  seems  to 
have leaned predominately towards the Advait principle.  Rãmanuj’s 
principle    is    that jeevs, Mãyã,    and Purushottam are    eternal; 
Purushottam is   the   controller   of   the jeevs   and Mãyã;   He   is   the 
ultimate cause of all; He forever dwells in His Akshardhãm in a divya 
svarup;  all avatãrs originate  from  Him;  and  it  is  this Purushottam 
Nãrãyan that    should    be    worshiped.        This    seems    to    be    the 
understanding  of  Rãmanuj.    Vallabh-Ãchãrya  seems  to  have  intense 
faith only in bhakti.  All these ãchãryas have occasionally referred to 
other  principles  in  their  own shãstras,  but  ultimately,  in  one  way  or 
another,  they  have  leaned  towards  their  own  personal  preference.  
Their  views  can  be  accurately  understood  from  the  statements  in 
their shãstras. 

LOYÃ 
- 363 - 
14.3
 “In the same way, having listened to my talks, what have all of you 
realised  my  personal  preference  to  be?    Just  as  a  thread  passes 
through the eye of a needle, or a thread runs through each and every 
bead  of  a mãlã,  which  principle  is  consistently  interwoven  in  all  of 
my talks?  Please state your beliefs.” 
 
14.4
 All the senior paramhans spoke according to their understanding. 
 
14.5
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “Here,  allow  me  to  reveal  my  own 
principles and preferences. 
 
14.6
 “First of all, I like the fact that although Rushabh-Dev Bhagvãn had 
attained  oneness  with Vãsudev,  and  despite  being Bhagvãn Himself, 
when siddhi appeared  before  Him,  He  did  not  accept  them  because 
He  wished  to  set  an  example  for  all tyãgis.    Also,  the  Shreemad 
Bhãgvat  states:   ‘Even an accomplished yogi should never trust his 
mind – even though he may appear to have conquered it’.   
 
14.7
 “There are also these shloks: 
 
na kuryat-karhichit-sakhyam manasi hyanavasthite 
yadvistram-bhãchirãch-cheernam chaskanda tapa aishvaram 
Never befriend the mind because it is very unstable; it has even destroyed the 
tap of the devs that were accumulated after extensive activities over a great 
period of time.  
 
nityam dadãti kãmasya-chhidram tam-anu yerayaha 
yoginaha kruta-maitrasya patyur-jãyeva punshchalee 
The minds of those yogis who have befriended their minds continuously allow 
kãm to enter.  Other enemies, such as krodh, lobh, and moh, follow the kãm 
into the mind.  In this way, the mind brings about the downfall of the yogis, 
just as an unfaithful wife brings about the downfall of her trusting husband. 
 
 “In this way, I like a tyãgi who does not trust his mind. 
 

LOYÃ 
- 364 - 
14.8
 “Also, in my mind I do not like other loks as much as I like Shvet-Dvip 
and Badrikãshram.    In  fact,  I  feel  that  it  would  be  very  good  to  go 
there to perform tap without any food.  I would prefer not to indulge 
in the various types of pleasures of the other loks. 
 
14.9
 “Furthermore, I realise that the many avatãrs are  all  ultimately  of 
Bhagvãn; yet, among these avatãrs, I like Rushabh-Dev greatly.  I also 
like Kapil-Dev and Dattãtrey equally,  but  to  a  lesser  extent  than 
Rushabh-Dev.  But, more than these three, I have a million-fold more 
love for the avatãr of Shree Krishna.  I feel, ‘This avatãr is greater and 
more powerful than all the others.  Also, in him, a person cannot make 
the distinction of the avatãr and the source of the avatãr’.  On  the 
other  hand,  I  do  not  have  a  great  liking  for  the  other avatãrs of 
Bhagvãn, such as Matsya and Kurma. 
 
14.10
 “In addition to this, my understanding is as follows:  There is a great 
mass of divine light, which cannot be measured from above, below, or 
in  any  of  the  four  directions;  it  is  endless.    Amidst  this  mass  of  light 
lies  a  large sinhãsan,  upon  which  presides  the divya murti of Shree 
Nãrãyan Purushottam Bhagvãn.    Countless  millions  of muktas are 
seated  around  that sinhãsan,  enjoying  the darshan of Bhagvãn.    I 
constantly  see  Him  accompanied  by  the muktas.    Moreover,  that 
Bhagvãn is extremely luminous.  At times, when I cannot see Bhagvãn 
with  the sabhã of muktas due  to  this  luminosity,  I  feel  deeply  hurt.  
Despite being able to constantly see this mass of divine light, I am not 
fascinated by it; I experience profound bliss only from the darshan of 
Bhagvãn’s murti.  This is my upãsanã. 
 
14.11
 “Moreover, I like the bhakti that the gopis had towards Bhagvãn.  For 
this reason, I continuously observe people, and having seen the love a 
lustful woman has for a man, or a lustful man has for a woman, I feel, 
‘It would be good to have such love for Bhagvãn’.  Also, whenever I see 
someone having great love for their son, or their money, I again feel, 
‘It  would  be  good to  have  such  love  for  Bhagvãn’.  That  is  why 
whenever  I  hear  someone  singing,  I  would  either  send  someone  to 

LOYÃ 
- 365 - 
that person, or I would personally go there, and I would feel, ‘What he 
is doing, is very good’. 
 
14.12
 “Also, I only get along with a person who has no svabhãvs,  such  as 
kãm, krodh, lobh, mãn, irshyã, kapat, svãd, sneh, dambh; a person who 
follows dharma as  prescribed  in  the  Dharma-Shãstras;  and  a  person 
who has bhakti towards Bhagvãn.  I enjoy the company of only such a 
person.  If a person is not like that, then I do not get along with him, 
even if he is staying close to me.  In fact, I feel a dislike towards them. 
 
14.13
 “Initially, I had a strong dislike for anyone with kãm.  However, now I 
have  a  strong  dislike  for  those  who  have krodh, mãn,  or irshyã.    The 
reason is that a person with kãm passes his days in satsang by being 
humble – like  a grahastha bhakta;  but  as  for  those  who  have krodh, 
mãn, or irshyã, they can be seen to definitely regress in satsang.  For 
this reason, I am deeply saddened by these types of people. 
 
14.14
 “What is mãn like?    Well,  a  person  with mãn remains  arrogant  even 
before those who are superior to him; he cannot become humble and 
serve them. 
 
14.15
 “Now, allow me to summarise my preferences in brief.  I do not agree 
with Shankar Swãmi’s belief of Advait principle.  Rãmãnuj  Swãmi 
describes Purushottam Bhagvãn as  greater  than  the  perishable  and 
the  imperishable;  I  worship  that Purushottam Bhagvãn.    My bhakti 
towards  that Purushottam Bhagvãn is  like  that  of  the gopis,  and  the 
qualities of vairãgya and ãtmã-nishthã within me are like Shukji’s and 
Jadbharat’s.  These are my principles and preferences.  Intelligent 
bhaktas can  realise  this  if  they  analyse  my  talks  as  well  as  the 
shãstras of  our sampradãy which  have  been  accepted  by  me  as 
trustworthy.” 
 
14.16
 Therefore,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  spoke  for  the  sake  of  His bhaktas,  while 
He Himself is Purushottam Nãrãyan. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Loyã || 14 || 122 || 

LOYÃ 
- 366 - 
Loyã – 15 
Ãtmã-Darshan 
 
15.1
 In the Samvat year 1877, on the night of Mãgshar vad 13 [2
nd
 January, 
1821], Shreeji Mahãrãj was sitting in Surã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Loyã.  
He  was  wearing  a  warm,  red dagli and  a  white khes.    He  had  tied  a 
white feto around His head, and had tied a bokãni with another white 
feto.    In  addition  to  this, He  had  covered  Himself with  a chofãl and  a 
pachhedi.  A sabhã of paramhans, as well as haribhaktas from various 
places, had gathered before Him. 
 
15.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said out of compassion, “The jeev pervades the 
entire  body  from  head  to  toe  through  its  three  powers  of adhyãtma, 
adhibhut,  and adhidev.    Through  the indriyas,  and  their  presiding 
devs, it experiences the vishays, but it cannot experience anything by 
being distinct from the presiding devs and the indriyas.” 
 
15.3
 Then, Nityãnand Swãmi raised a doubt:  “Mahãrãj, it is said that the 
jeev pervades  the  whole  body  in  general,  but  resides  specifically 
within  the  heart.  So,  how  should  a  person  understand  the  fact  that 
awareness is not present everywhere equally?” 
 
15.4
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “The sun pervades each and every object 
equally  by  its  rays,  but  its  light  is  seen  according  to  the  object  it 
shines  upon.    For example,  pure  sunlight  is  not  experienced  as 
intensely on stone or sand or in dirty water as it is on a floor made of 
glass  or  in  clean  water.    Therefore,  just  as  a  person  experiences  a 
greater and lesser intensity in the sun’s light, in the same way, even 
though the jeev resides equally in the indriyas, the antah-karans, and 
the  organs  of  the indriyas,  a  person  experiences  its  power  more 
intensely in the indriyas because of their purity.  For example, does a 
person experience as much sensation in his nose and ears as he does 
in  his  eyes?    Certainly  not.    Furthermore,  the  four antah-karans  are 
even   purer   than   the indriyas,   and   so   the jeev’s power   can   be 

LOYÃ 
- 367 - 
experienced   there   even   more   intensely.      In   comparison,   it   is 
experienced to a lesser degree in the indriyas.  Nevertheless, the jeev 
does pervade the entire body equally.” 
 
15.5
 Then, Brahmãnand Swãmi asked, “Many see the jeev to be like a star, 
or  like  the  flame  of  an  oil  lamp,  or  like  the  flash  from  a  firecracker.  
How should a person understand these differences in experiences?” 
 
15.6
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “Just as a person who has mastered akshi-
vidyã can see the jeev and the murti of Bhagvãn within with his eyes, 
a  person  who  has  realised  the ãtmã through  the indriyas sees  the 
ãtmã in  a  similar  way.   For  example,  if  there  was  a  glass-statue 
shaped  in  the svarup of  a  human – with  all  of  its  limbs,  hair,  and 
vessels  made  of  glass – and  if  it  were  filled  with  light,  then  the  light 
would  be  seen  only  according  to  the  size  and  shape  of  the  tubes 
within;  it would  not  be  seen  everywhere.    In  the  very  same  way, 
people  describe  the  nature  of  the jeev according  to  however  they 
have  seen  it.    However,  because  they  have  not  attained nirãvaran 
drashti,  they  do  not  see  the ãtmã as  it  is.    However,  when  a  person 
who  has  not  attained nirãvaran  drashti and  is  one  with  his ãtmã,  he 
no  longer  perceives  the  divisions  of  the  different  organs  of  the 
indriyas; instead, he realises the ãtmã as it truly is. 
 
15.7
 “Just as a person who has attained the viewpoint of ãkãsh does  not 
perceive  the  other  four bhuts,  similarly,  a  person  with nirãvaran 
drashti does  not  perceive  differences  in  the jeev’s light  arising  from 
its indriyas,  their  organs  and  presiding devs,  and  the antah-karans; 
instead,  he  realises  the jeev precisely  as  it  is.    On  the  other  hand,  a 
person  who  perceives  distinctions  does  not  realise  the jeev as  it  is.  
For  example,  from  a  group  of  people,  one  person  saw  the  tail  of  a 
cow, one person saw its mouth, one person saw its hoof, one person 
saw  its  belly,  and  one  person  saw  its  udder.    Whichever  part  of  the 
cow   was   seen,   belonged   to   the   cow,   yet   no   one   saw   the   cow 
completely.    However,  because  at  least  one  part  was  seen,  it  can  be 

LOYÃ 
- 368 - 
said that the cow was actually seen.  In the same way, a person can be 
said  to  have  had  the darshan of  the ãtmã to  the  extent  to  which  he 
has  seen  the  light  of  the ãtmã through  his indriyas or antah-karans.  
However,  this  cannot  be  said  to  be  perfect darshan of  the ãtmã.  
Therefore,  I  have  explained  the  general  and  the  specific  experiences 
of the jeev in this way.”  
 
15.8
 At  that  point,  Nityãnand  Swãmi  questioned,  “Mahãrãj,  you  have 
described the jeev as being nirãkãr.  Therefore, when Bhagvãn dwells 
within the jeev, does He reside without a svarup, or does He possess a 
svarup?” 
 
15.9
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  clarified,  “Bhagvãn dwells   as   the   refuge   of   the 
indriyas,  the antah-karans,  their  presiding devs,  and  the jeev.    For 
example, Shree Krishna Bhagvãn made Uddhavji explain to the gopis, 
‘I am near to you by being the refuge of your indriyas,  antah-karans, 
their  presiding  devs,  and  the  jeev.    Just  as  the  very  same  five  mahã-
bhuts which reside in the brahmãnds are also within everyone’s body, 
similarly, I reside in Mathurã like the mahã-bhuts reside predominantly 
in  the  brahmãnds;  but  just  like  those  mahã-bhuts  reside  subtly  in  the 
bodies of the jeevs, I also reside within all of you.  The fact that I cannot 
be  seen  is  to  keep  the  vrutti  of  your  mind  confined  within  me;  that  is 
why I cannot be seen.  Nevertheless, I reside within you, and I possess a 
definite murti’.” 
 
15.10
 Hearing this, Nityãnand Swãmi questioned further, “Mahãrãj, does 
Bhagvãn,  who  resides  as  the  refuge  of  the indriyas, antah-karans, 
their  presiding devs, and  the jeev,  reside  in  the svarup of Purush, 
Akshar, or as Purushottam Himself?” 
 
15.11
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The light of the jeev, Purush, Akshar,  and 
Purushottam is very similar in terms of luminosity.  So much so, that 
no  one  is  capable  of  distinguishing  between  their  light.    However, 
they are absolutely distinct from each other, but no one is capable of 

LOYÃ 
- 369 - 
seeing  these  distinctions.   Only  a  person  who  receives  a  divine  body 
composed of divine light by the grace of Bhagvãn realises, ‘This is my 
own self, this is Purush, this is Akshar, and this is Purushottam – who is 
distinct from all’.  In this way, a person can see them separately, and 
their    light    distinctly.        However,    no    one    else    is    capable    of 
distinguishing  between  them.    Therefore, Bhagvãn may  reside  in 
whichever svarup He chooses, but it is He Himself who resides within 
the jeev – no one else.” 
 
15.12
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj continued, “There are three sets of shãstras 
which  are  eternal   and  which   describe   only   the svarup of Shree 
Krishna Bhagvãn.        They    are    Yog,   Sãnkhya,   and    Vedãnt    (the 
Upanishads).    I  shall  now  explain  the  principles  of  each,  so  please 
listen. 
 
15.13
 “Those belonging to the Sãnkhya philosophy propose the existence of 
twenty-four tattvas and  believe  that Bhagvãn is  greater  than  them; 
that  is, Bhagvãn is  the  twenty-fifth tattva.    However,  they  do  not 
accept jeev and ishvar as being distinct from the twenty-four tattvas.  
Their  reasoning  is  that  the tattvas cannot  be  sustained  without  the 
jeev;  so  the jeev is  imagined  only  as  a  form  of  the tattvas because  of 
its close co-existence with them.  As a result, they do not consider the 
jeev to  be  distinct.    Also,  just as  they  regard  the jeev as a  form  of  the 
tattvas,  they  regard  the ishvars as  a  form  of  the  twenty-four tattvas.  
In this way, they imagine both jeev and ishvar among the twenty-four 
tattvas,  and  therefore  count  them  together  with  the  twenty-four 
tattvas; they do not consider them as being distinct from the tattvas.  
This, along with believing Bhagvãn to be the twenty-fifth tattva, is the 
philosophy of Sãnkhya. 
 
15.14
 “Despite this, a person should not conclude that there is no jeev at all, 
because  the  proposers  of  Sãnkhya  have  prescribed  the  six spiritual 
activities  (shat-sampatti – sham, dam, uparati,   titikshã, samãdhãn, 
and shraddhã) as well as shravan, manan, and nididhyãs, for the jeev.  

LOYÃ 
- 370 - 
By  behaving  in  this  way,  the jeev attains  a  thought  that  eventually 
leads  to  the  realisation  of  its  distinction  from  the tattvas.    Then,  a 
person  engages  in  the  worship  of Bhagvãn,  realising  himself  to  be 
brahm-rup.    This  is  the  Sãnkhya  philosophy.    It  is  also  mentioned  in 
the Moksh-Dharma, where Nãradji explains to Shukdevji: 
 
tyaja dharmam-adharma cha ubhe satyanrute tyaja 
ubhe satyanrute tyaktvã yena tyajasi tat-tyaja 
 
“The meaning of this shlok is  that  when  a mumukshu prepares  to 
think about his ãtmã, he should abandon all thoughts of dharma and 
adharma, satya and asatya, which disturb him.  In fact, he should also 
abandon the thought by which he abandons these other thoughts.  In 
this  way,  he  should  behave  as brahm-rup.    However,  the shlok does 
not  suggest  that  a  person  should  physically  abandon  the niyams in 
the form of dharma.  This is the correct interpretation of the shlok. 
 
15.15
 “Next, proposers of the Yog philosophy promote the twenty-four 
tattvas distinctly  from  the jeev and ishvar,  whom  they  regard  as  the 
twenty-fifth tattva, and Bhagvãn as the twenty-sixth.  With the power 
of  discrimination  they  distinguish  the  twenty-fifth tattva (jeev)  from 
the other tattvas, and after firmly resolving that to be their form, they 
gather  the vruttis of  the  twenty-four tattvas and  forcefully  attach 
them to the twenty-sixth tattva (Bhagvãn); they do not allow them to 
be  drawn  towards  the vishays.    They  believe, ‘If my vruttis abandon 
Bhagvãn and wander elsewhere, I will have to pass through the cycle of 
births and deaths’.  Therefore,  they  forcibly  keep  the vruttis of  their 
indriyas and antah-karans on Bhagvãn. 
 
15.16
 “In comparison, the proposers of Sãnkhya believe, ‘I have no indriyas 
or  antah-karans,  so  where  shall  the  vruttis  go?’  Therefore,  they 
consider  themselves  to  be brahm-rup and  remain  fearless.    Those 
belonging  to  the  Yog  philosophy  remain  constantly  fearful.    For 
example,  if  a  person  had  to  carry  a  pot  filled  to  the  brim  with  oil  up 
some stairs without spilling any oil at all, and if two swordsmen with 

LOYÃ 
- 371 - 
drawn swords were on both sides trying to frighten him, that person 
would be extremely afraid.  Followers of Yog remain just as afraid of 
the vishays and  strive  to  keep  their vrutti fixed  on Bhagvãn.    This  is 
the philosophy of Yog. 
 
15.17
 “Vedãnt (the Upanishads) explains only Bhagvãn, who is the ultimate 
cause of all, as being the truth; they claim all else to be false.  Just as 
when  a  person  attains  the  viewpoint  of ãkãsh,  he  does  not  perceive 
the  other tattvas,  in  the  same  way,  a  person  who  sees  only brahm, 
perceives nothing else.  That is the philosophy of Vedãnt.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Loyã || 15 || 123 || 
 
 
Loyã – 16 
Worldly Desires Becoming Blunt And Uprooted 
 
16.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  after  the sandhyã ãrti on Mãgshar  vad 14 
[3
rd
 January,   1821],   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated 
bedstead in Surã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Loyã.  He was wearing a white 
khes and a warm, red dagli.  He has also tied a white feto around His 
head,  and  had  tied  a bokãni with  another  white feto.    A sabhã of 
paramhans, as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered 
before Him.  
 
16.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “May the paramhans please  engage  in  a 
question-answer discussion.” 
 
16.3
 Then,  Mahãrãj  Himself  asked  a  question:    “What  are  the 
characteristics  of  a  person  whose  worldly  desires  have  not  become 
blunt, whose worldly desires have become blunt, and whose worldly 
desires have been completely uprooted?” 
 
16.4
 Muktãnand Swãmi began to answer the question, but could not reply 
adequately. 

LOYÃ 
- 372 - 
16.5
 So, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “The vruttis of  the indriyas of  a  person 
whose worldly desires have not become blunt, cling to the vishays.  In 
fact,   they   cannot   be   dislodged   even   by   a   thought   process.      In 
comparison,  the vruttis of  a  person  whose  worldly  desires  have 
become  blunt  do  not  enter  the vishays immediately.    If  the vruttis 
were  to  enter  the vishays,  and  he  attempts  to  withdraw  them,  they 
would  withdraw  instantly;  they  would  not  remain  attached  to  the 
vishays.    However,  a  person  whose  worldly  desires  have  become 
completely  uprooted  is  unaware  of  the vishays during  the jãgrat 
state,  just  as  he  is  during  the sushupti state.  He  would  regard  all 
pleasant  and  unpleasant vishays as  equal  and  would  behave  as  a 
person who is gunãtit.” 
 
16.6
 Then,  Gopãlãnand Swãmi asked, “A person’s worldly desires may 
have  become  blunt,  but  what  is  the  reason  for  them  not  being 
removed from their roots?” 
 
16.7
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  explained,  “The  answer  is  that  if  a  person  has 
perfectly  absorbed  the  following  four  qualities,  then  his  worldly 
desires will become uprooted:  gnãn in the form of knowledge of that 
ãtmã; vairãgya in  the  form  of  detachment  from  all  things  that  have 
evolved  out  of Prakruti; dharma in  the  form  of brahm-chãrya;  and 
bhakti coupled  with  the  knowledge  of Bhagvãn’s greatness.    Any 
deficiency in  these  four  qualities  leads  to  a  deficiency  in uprooting  a 
person’s worldly desires.” 
 
16.8
 Having given the reply, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Now, allow me to ask a 
question.    Countless  spiritual  activities  have  been  prescribed  for  a 
mumukshu to perform in order to attain Bhagvãn.  Out of all of them, 
by which one powerful activity can all flaws be eradicated and all gun 
be acquired?” 
 
16.9
 The paramhans could not answer the question. 
 

LOYÃ 
- 373 - 
16.10
 So, Shreeji Mahãrãj revealed, “If a person has bhakti coupled with the 
knowledge  of Bhagvãn’s countless  powers  as  described  by Kapil-Dev 
to Devhuti, then all of his flaws would be eradicated: 
 
mad-bhayãd-vãti vãto-yam suryas-tapati mad-bhayãt 
It is by fear of me that Vãyu (wind) blows, Surya (sun) shines, Indra (clouds) 
rains, Agni (fire) burns, and Yam (death) devours the living 
 
“Moreover, even if a person does not possess gnãn, vairãgya,  and 
dharma,  he  still  attains  them.   Therefore,  this spiritual  activity  is  the 
best of all.” 
 
16.11
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked another question:  “A person with kapat, 
who is also clever, cunningly conceals his kapat.  Please explain how 
such a person’s kapat can be recognised?” 
 
16.12
 Brahmãnand Swãmi answered, “Such a person can be recognised by 
the  fact  that  he  keeps  the  company  of  someone  who  is  an  enemy  of 
satsang and  who  speaks  unkindly  of Bhagvãn and  His sant.    Such  a 
person cannot be known by any other means.” 
 
16.13
 Shreeji Mahãrãj accepted the answer, but questioned further, “Yes, 
but  how  can  such  a  person  be  recognised  if  he  does  not  keep  the 
company of such people?” 
 
16.14
 Brahmãnand Swãmi then added, “His kapat would  be  exposed  in 
times of difficult circumstances.” 
 
16.15
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  confirmed,  “That  is  the  correct  answer  to  the 
question.” 
 
16.16
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked another question:  “Which single avgun 
transforms all of a person’s gun to avgun?” 
 
16.17
 Shreepãt Devãnand Swãmi replied, “If someone criticises a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn, then all of his gun become as good as avgun.” 

LOYÃ 
- 374 - 
16.18
 Shreeji Mahãrãj clarified, “That is true, but I had another answer in 
mind.  A person may well be endowed with each and every gun, but if 
he believes Bhagvãn to be nirãkãr, then that is a great flaw.  So much 
so, that because of this avgun, all of his gun become avgun.” 
 
16.19
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Why does a person perceive avgun in a 
sãdhu?” 
 
16.20
 The paramhans attempted  to  answer  the  question,  but  were  unable 
to give a precise answer. 
 
16.21
 So, Shreeji Mahãrãj answered the question Himself:  “A person with 
mãn perceives avgun in a sãdhu.  This is because it is the very nature 
of  someone  who  has mãn,  that  if  someone  praises  him,  even  though 
that person may have a hundred avgun, he would overlook them and 
would instead  greatly  highlight a single gun.    Conversely,  if  a  person 
does  not  praise  him,  then  even  though  that  person  may have  a 
hundred gun,  he  would  overlook  all  of  them and  highlight  an  utterly 
insignificant avgun.  Consequently, he would initially spite the person 
mentally, then verbally, and ultimately physically as well.  Therefore, 
mãn is  a  great  flaw.    However,  do  not  think  that  only  the  wise  have 
mãn and  the  naïve  do  not.    In  actual  fact,  the  naïve  have  more mãn 
than the wise.” 
 
16.22
 Then,  Muktãnand  Swãmi  asked,  “Mahãrãj,  how  can mãn be 
eradicated?” 
 
16.23
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  explained, “A person who thoroughly realises the 
greatness of Bhagvãn does not have mãn.  Look at Uddhavji, and how 
wise  he  was!    He  was  skilled  in  the  Niti-Shãstra,  and  had  physical 
characteristics like that of a king.  However, as he had understood the 
greatness  of Bhagvãn,  he  put  aside  his mãn upon  seeing  the  love  of 
the gopis for Bhagvãn,  and  prayed, ‘May I become a tree, a vine, a 
blade grass, or maybe a shrub – anything that has been touched by the 
dust from the feet of the gopis’. 

LOYÃ 
- 375 - 
16.24
 “Tulsidãs has also said:  
 
tulsee jyake mukhanse bhoole nikase rãm 
tãke pag kee paheniyãm mere tan kee chãm 
 
“This  means  that  even  if  someone  utters  the  name  of Bhagvãn 
unintentionally,  a  person  who  realises Bhagvãn’s greatness  would 
make shoes from his own skin and offer them to that person.  If that 
is  so,  would  he  have  any mãn before  a bhakta of Bhagvãn who 
constantly  engages  himself  in  worship  and  in  chanting  the  name  of 
Bhagvãn,   who   bows   down   to Bhagvãn,   and   who   realises   the 
greatness  of Bhagvãn?    Certainly  not.    Therefore, mãn is  eradicated 
when   a   person   realises   the   greatness   of Bhagvãn,   but   without 
understanding   the   greatness  of Bhagvãn, mãn simply  cannot   be 
eradicated.    Therefore,  whoever  wishes  to  eradicate mãn should 
realise the greatness of Bhagvãn and His sant.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Loyã || 16 || 124 || 
 
 
Loyã – 17 
Not Perceiving Avgun 
 
17.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on  the  night  of Mãgshar  vad  Amãs [4
th
 
January  1821],  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead 
in Surã Khãchar’s darbãr in Loyã.  He had tied a white feto around His 
head,  and  had  tied  a bokãni with  another  white feto.    He  was  also 
wearing a warm, red dagli with a white angarkhu inside.  He was also 
wearing  a  white khes.    In  addition  to  this,  He  had  covered  Himself 
with  a chofãl,  over  which  He  had  wrapped  a  yellow rajãi.    Shreeji 
Mahãrãj  was  in  a  pleasant  mood.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
17.2
 Then, of His own will, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “See how powerful the 
force of Bhagvãn’s mãyã is!  It can cause great wickedness.  Someone 

LOYÃ 
- 376 - 
who  previously  seemed  very  good,  can  suddenly  become  extremely 
evil.” 
 
17.3
 So  saying,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  urged  the paramhans,  “Ask questions 
today, so that we can talk.” 
 
17.4
 Then,  Nityãnand  Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, the very same person who 
was  previously  good  and  who  prays  to Bhagvãn,  later  begins  to 
criticise Him.  How can a good person remain good and never let his 
understanding  become  impaired,  amidst  even  the  most  unpleasant 
desh, kãl, kriyã, and sang?” 
 
17.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “If a person is indifferent to his body, has 
firm ãtmã-nishthã,  maintains vairãgya towards  the panch-vishays, 
and has absolute nishchay in Bhagvãn coupled with the knowledge of 
His  greatness,  then  his  mind  will  never  become  distorted – even 
amidst the most unpleasant circumstances imaginable.  On the other 
hand,  a  person  who  believes  himself  to  be  the  body,  and  does  not 
have  an  intense  hatred  for  the panch-vishays,  would  spite  a sãdhu if 
he were to criticise the vishays, even though the sãdhu may be senior.  
Such a person would ultimately spite Bhagvãn as well.  Furthermore, 
if someone has firm nishchay in Bhagvãn, but lacks an extreme hatred 
towards the vishays and  is  still  attracted  to  them,  then  even  if  a 
person  like  Muktãnand  Swãmi  were  to  criticise  those  objects,  he 
would go as far as to cut off the person’s head with a sword in order 
to harm that person.” 
 
17.6
 “Nityãnand Swãmi then asked, “Someone may identify himself with 
the  body  and may  be  attracted  to  the panch-vishays;  yet  he seems  to 
survive in satsang.  How can this be explained?” 
 
17.7
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “He survives in satsang only as long as he is 
not  confronted  by  an  unpleasant  situation.    If  a  great sãdhu or 
Bhagvãn were to criticise his mãn, svãd, lobh, kãm, krodh, or his belief 
that  he  is  the  body,  then  he  would  surely  develop  a  dislike  for  the 
sãdhu.    Then,  he  would  certainly  insult  the sãdhu,  and  therefore  fall 

LOYÃ 
- 377 - 
from satsang.  For example, whoever has drank sweetened milk that 
has  been  poisoned  by  the  venom  of  a snake, even  though he  may  be 
living  at  present,  is  sure  to  die – within half  an  hour,  in  the morning 
or  in  the evening,  today  or  tomorrow;  eventually,  he  will  die.    In  the 
same  way,  he  who  identifies  himself  with  the  body,  will  definitely 
dislike  the sãdhu,  and  will  eventually  fall  from satsang – either  after 
one month or after two months; after one year or after two years or 
even  after ten  years;  or  maybe  at  the  time  of  death  or  even  after 
death – but he will certainly fall. 
 
17.8
 “In comparison, there is a person who does not identify himself with 
the   body   and   believes, ‘I  am  the  ãtmã,  due  to  which  this  body 
functions;   I   am   sachidãnand;   I   enlighten   the   indriyas   and   antah-
karans.    I  am  not  a  person  who  becomes  happy  by  possessing  wealth 
and  women;  nor  am  I  a  person  who  is  saddened  by  not  possessing 
them’.  Such a person never dislikes a sãdhu, no matter how strongly 
the sãdhu criticises the panch-vishays or the belief that he is the body.  
Furthermore,    he    would    never    quarrel    with    the sãdhu over 
insignificant issues, and nor would he hold a grudge against him.” 
 
17.9
 Then, Nityãnand Swãmi asked again, “How can a person recognise 
someone who has a hatred for the panch-vishays?” 
 
17.10
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “A person with a hatred for the panch-
vishays can  be  recognised  by  the following characteristics:   When he 
receives luxurious food, he would eat it, but he would not enjoy it as 
much  as  he  would  enjoy  eating  simple  food.    In  fact,  he  would  be 
troubled by it.  Also, he would become upset wearing fine clothes; he 
would  not  enjoy  them  as  much  as  he  would  enjoy  wearing tattered, 
coarse clothes.  In fact, his mind becomes troubled by fine clothes.  If 
he  were  to  receive  a  luxurious  bed,  or  if  someone  were  to  honour 
him,  or  if  he  were  to  receive  any  sort  of  pleasant  object,  his  mind 
would  become  troubled  by  it;  in  no  way would  he  be  pleased  by  it.  
On seeing such a person, a person should realise, ‘He has a hatred for 
the vishays’.” 

LOYÃ 
- 378 - 
17.11
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked another question, “Mahãrãj, how can 
a hatred for the panch-vishays be developed?” 
 
17.12
 Shreeji    Mahãrãj    explained,  “The  most  important  method  for 
developing  such  a  hatred  for  the panch-vishays,  is  the  knowledge  of 
Bhagvãn’s greatness, followed by ãtmã-nishthã and vairãgya. 
 
17.13
 “Now, what is this greatness of Bhagvãn?  Well, it is due to the fear of 
Bhagvãn that Indra rains;  that  the  sun,  the  moon,  and  flames  of  fire 
emit light; that the earth supports one and all; that the oceans do not 
exceed  their  boundaries;  and  that  the  herbs  produce  fruit  in  their 
appropriate seasons.  Also, it is Bhagvãn who is the creator, sustainer, 
and  destroyer  of  the  world,  and  whose  powers  include Kãl, Mãyã, 
Purush,  and Akshar.    Then,  what  object  in  the  world  can  attract 
someone who has understood the greatness of Bhagvãn in this way?  
Well,  not  even  kãm, krodh, lobh, mãn, irshyã, svãd,  fine  clothes, 
wealth, women, and none of the panch-vishays can bind him.  This is 
because he has assessed everything.  He knows, ‘Bhagvãn is like this, 
and these are the rewards of engaging in Bhagvãn’s worship and 
listening   to   kathãs   and   talks.      Akshar   is   like   this,   and   the   bliss 
associated  with  him  is  like  this.    Furthermore,  the  pleasures  of  Golok, 
Vaikunth,  and  Shvet-Dvip  are  like  this,  the  pleasures  of  Prakruti  and 
Purush  are  like  this,  the  pleasures  of  Brahm-Lok  are  like  this,  the 
pleasures of Svarg are like this, and the happiness of a kingdom is like 
this’. 
 
17.14
 “In this way, a person who has understood the happiness hidden 
within everything, realises the bliss of Bhagvãn to be the highest and 
then  attaches  himself  to  Him.    Is  there  any  object  in  the  world  that 
can  draw  him  away  from  the  holy  feet  of Bhagvãn?    There  is  none.  
For example, take a piece of iron.  Once touched by a pãrasmani, it is 
transformed  into  gold.    It cannot  be  transformed  back  into  iron;  not 
even by the pãrasmani itself.  Similarly, a person who has realised the 
greatness  of Bhagvãn cannot  be  made  to  fall  from  the  holy  feet  of 

LOYÃ 
- 379 - 
Bhagvãn, not even by Bhagvãn Himself.  Then, how could he be made 
to fall by any other object?  Of course he cannot. 
 
17.15
 “In addition to realising the greatness of Bhagvãn, such a person also 
deeply  realises  the  greatness  of  a sant who  worships Bhagvãn.    He 
feels, ‘This sant is truly great because he is a true bhakta of Bhagvãn’.  
For  example,  Uddhav  was  very  educated,  but  as  he  had  understood 
the  greatness  of Bhagvãn,  he  did  not  become  arrogant  due  to  his 
intelligence.  In fact, he yearned for the dust from the feet of the gopis, 
and  therefore  asked  to  be  reborn  as  a  vine.   The reason  for  this  was 
that  he  had  witnessed  the  profound  love  the gopis had  towards 
Bhagvãn,  whom  even  the shloks of  the  Veds  seek.    So,  how  can  a 
person  who  realises  the  greatness  of  a sant of Bhagvãn hold  any 
arrogance  before  a sant?    Why  could  he  not  bow down  to  him?    In 
actual fact, he would behave as a dãs of a dãs before a sant.  Even if a 
sant were to repeatedly physically mistreat him, he would tolerate it 
and would believe, ‘It is my great fortune that I am bearing the hatred 
of  such  a  sant.    Due  to my  prãrabdha,  I  would  have  been  forced  to 
endure the abuses of my wife and children, my parents, and the king.  I 
may even have had to eat the leaves of spinach and moss.  At least here, 
in  the  company  of  the  sant,  I  am  fortunate  enough  to  be  able  to  keep 
the  vow  of  nisvãd.    Due  to  my  prãrabdha,  I  may  have  been  forced  to 
wear  tattered  clothes  or  rags;  but  at  least  here  with  the  sant  I  am 
fortunate enough to have a blanket to cover myself with’. 
 
17.16
 “Conversely,  if  a  person  enters  a sabhã of sãdhus   and is   not 
appropriately   honoured   by   a sant,   and  if   he   then   has   a  dislike 
towards that sant, it implies that he has not realised the greatness of 
the sant;  otherwise  he  would  not  have  a  dislike  towards  the sant in 
that  way.    Consider  the  following  as  an  example:    If  the  British 
Governor of Mumbai were seated in an assembly, and if at that time a 
poor  man  were  to  enter  that  assembly,  but  was  not  given  a  seat  or 
welcomed  in  anyway,  would  the  poor  man  become  angry  with  the 
Governor?    Would  he  feel  like  swearing  at the  Governor?    Not  at  all.  
This  is  because  the  poor  man  has  realised  the  importance  of  the 

LOYÃ 
- 380 - 
British official, and thinks, ‘He is the ruler of the land, and I am a mere 
pauper’.  For this reason, he does not become upset.  In the same way, 
if  a  person  has realised  the  greatness  of  a sant,  then  regardless  of 
how  much  the sant hates  him,  he  would  never  become  upset  with 
that sant.  If fact, if he does find an avgun in anyone, he would find it 
in  himself,  but  in  no  way  would  he  perceive  an avgun in  the sant.  
Therefore,  a  person  who  has  realised  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn and 
His sant has  a  firm  foundation  in satsang.    Conversely,  a  person 
cannot   be   certain   about   someone   who   has   not   realised   such 
greatness.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Loyã || 17 || 125 || 
 
 
Loyã – 18 
Nishchay In Bhagvãn 
 
18.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on  the  night  of Posh  sud 1  [5
th
 January, 
1821], Swãmi Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a decorated 
bedstead in Surã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Loyã.  He was wearing a white 
khes and  a  warm,  red dagli.    In  addition  to  this,  He  had  covered 
Himself with a chofãl and a rajãi.  He had tied a white feto around His 
head,  and  had  tied  a bokãni with  another  white feto.    A sabhã of 
paramhans, as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered 
before Him. 
 
18.2
 Then, after the paramhans had finished the sandhyã ãrti and prayers, 
Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Please sing a kirtan.”  Then, Muktãnand Swãmi 
and   some   other paramhans sang kirtans while   playing   musical 
instruments. 
 
18.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Please  conclude  the  singing  as  I  wish  to 
talk.  If any doubts arise in what I say, please ask.” 
 
18.4
 So  saying,  He  began,  “To  develop nishchay in Bhagvãn is   more 
difficult   than   anything   else.      Also,   as   this   topic   of nishchay is 

LOYÃ 
- 381 - 
extremely   complex,   I   am   afraid   of   discussing   it.      I   feel, ‘Upon 
discussing  this  topic,  what  if  someone  was  to  misunderstand  it?    What 
if,  due  to  this  discussion,  any  characteristic  that  a  person  may  have 
firmly developed were to be destroyed or uprooted?’  However, there is 
no alternative but to reveal this fact.  If a person does not interpret it 
correctly,  many  problems  can  arise.    But,  until  a  person  has  not 
understood    this    fact,    a    great    deficiency    will    remain    in    his 
understanding.  That is why I wish to deliver this talk. 
 
18.5
 “When Bhagvãn assumed  the svarup of Varãh,  His svarup as  a  boar 
was  very  ugly.    During  the avatãr of Matsya,  His svarup was  exactly 
like  that  of  a  fish.    During  the Kurma avatãr,  His svarup was  exactly 
like  that  of  other  turtles.    In  the Nrusinh avatãr,  His svarup was  as 
frightening as a lion.  During the Vãman avatãr, His svarup was like a 
dwarf,  with  short  hands  and  legs,  a  board  waist  and  a  plump  body.  
During the Vyãs avatãr, He appeared black, with lots of body hair and 
a foul body odour. 
 
18.6
 “All those who attained Bhagvãn in  whichever svarup He  had  taken, 
performed dhyãn on  that  particular svarup.    As  a  result  of  that 
meditation, they attained a svarup similar to that svarup of Bhagvãn.  
Now,  did  those  who  attained Varãh,  see Bhagvãn exactly like  a  boar 
in  His dhãm?    Did  those  who  attained Matsya,  see Bhagvãn exactly 
like a fish in His dhãm?  Did those who attained Kurma, see Bhagvãn 
exactly like a turtle in His dhãm?  Did those who attained Nrusinh see 
Bhagvãn exactly  like  a  lion  in  His dhãm?  Did  those  who  attained 
Hayagriv see Bhagvãn exactly as a horse in His dhãm?  Did those who 
worshipped Varãh as  if  He  were  their  husband  become  a  female 
boar?    Did  those  who  worshipped  Him  with  the  love  of  a  friend 
become  a  boar?    Did  those  who  worshipped Matsya as  if  He  were 
their husband become a female fish?  Did those who worshipped Him 
with  the  love  of  a  friend  become  a  fish?    Did  those  who  worshipped 
Kurma as  if  He  were  their  husband  become  a  female  turtle?    Did 
those who worshipped Him with the love of a friend become a turtle?  
Did  those  who  worshipped Nrusinh as  if  He  were  their  husband 

LOYÃ 
- 382 - 
become a lioness?  Did those who worshipped Him with the love of a 
friend  become  a  lion?    Did  those  who  worshipped Hayagriv as  if  He 
were   their   husband   become   a   female   horse?      Did   those   who 
worshipped  Him  with  the  love  of  a  friend  become  a  horse?    If  the 
original svarup of Bhagvãn was exactly like that of the avatãr, then by 
meditating  on  them,  the bhaktas of  each avatãr should  attain  that 
same svarup,  and  all  that  I have  just  mentioned  should  happen.  
However, this is not the case. 
 
18.7
 “Then, you may ask, ‘What is the svarup of that Bhagvãn like?’  Well, 
the answer is that Bhagvãn is sachidãnand, and possesses a murti full 
of  divine  light.    In  every  single  pore  of His  body,  there  is  light 
equivalent  to  millions and  millions  of  suns.    Moreover,  that Bhagvãn 
is so handsome that He puts even millions of Kãm-Devs to shame.  He 
is  the  lord  of  countless  millions  of brahmãnds,  the  king  of  kings,  the 
controller  of  all,  the antaryãmi of  all,  and  extremely  blissful.    In 
comparison  to  His  bliss,  the  pleasure  of  seeing  countless  beautiful 
women fades into insignificance.  In fact, before the bliss of the murti 
of the Bhagvãn, the pleasures of the vishays of this lok and the higher 
loks fade  into  insignificance.    Such  is  the svarup of Bhagvãn.    That 
svarup always has two arms, but by His wish, He may appear to have 
four  arms,  or  sometimes  may  appear  to  have  eight  arms,  or  He  may 
even be seen as having a thousand arms. 
 
18.8
 “Furthermore,  it  is  that  very Bhagvãn who  assumes  the svarup such 
as Matsya, Kurma, Varãh, and the svarup of Rãm and Krishna, for the 
purpose  of  fulfilling  some  task.    However,  he  does  not  abandon  His 
original svarup to assume the svarup of these avatãrs.  That Bhagvãn 
Himself  assumes  the svarups like Matsya and Kurma,  possessing 
countless  divine  powers and  great  strength.    Then,  once  the  task  for 
which He assumed a body is completed, He abandons that body.  For 
this reason, it is said in the Shreemad Bhãgvat: 
 
bhu-bhãraha kshapito yena tãm tanum vijahãvajah 
kantakam kantakeneva dvayam chãpeeshituhu samama 
 

LOYÃ 
- 383 - 
“This shlok explains  that  through  whichever  physical  body Bhagvãn 
relieved the burden of the earth, after removing the ‘thorn’ (the belief 
that  a  person  is  the body)  which  has  pierced  the chaitanya of  the 
beings, Bhagvãn also  abandoned  His  own  physical  body,  which  was 
the ‘thorn’ used to remove the other ‘thorn’. 
 
18.9
 “Also, Bhagvãn assumed  the svarup of Nrusinh for  the  purpose  of 
killing  a  demon.    After  completing  that  task,  He  decided  to  abandon 
that particular body.  But, who could kill a lion?  So, by Bhagvãn’s own 
will, Shiv (in the form of Kãl), came assuming the svarup of a sharabh.  
Nrusinh then fought the sharabh.  As a result, both left their physical 
bodies.      That   is   how Shiv came   to   be   known   as   Sharbheshvar 
Mahãdev,  and  the  location  where Nrusinhji left  his  body  became 
Nãrsinhi Shilã. 
 
18.10
 “Moreover, wherever paintings of Matsya, Kurma,  and  other avatãrs 
of Bhagvãn are portrayed, the lower portions of the paintings depict 
the svarup as  the  avatãr,  like  a  fish  or  a  turtle.    However,  the  upper 
portions of the paintings depict the murti of Bhagvãn with a shankh, a 
chakra, a gadã, a padma, a vaijayanti garland, silk garments, a crown, 
and  the shrivatsa mark,  as  well  as  other  symbols.    Therefore,  the 
murti of Bhagvãn is eternally like this. 
 
18.11
 “Initially,  at  the  time  of  His  birth, Shree   Krishna Bhagvãn gave 
darshan in  a  four-armed svarup to  Vasudev  and  Devki.    He also  gave 
darshan to  Akrur  in  water  in  a  four-armed svarup.    When  Rukmani 
fainted, He again gave darshan in a four-armed svarup.  Arjun has also 
said: 
 
tenaiva rupena chatur-bhujen sahasra-bãho bhava vishvamurte 
O one whose form is the svarup!  O thousand-armed!  
Please return to your original four-armed svarup! 
 
“So, Arjun also saw Him as having a four-armed svarup.  When Shree 
Krishna Bhagvãn was  seated  under  a  pipal  tree  after  the  Yadavs  had 

LOYÃ 
- 384 - 
slaughtered themselves, Uddhavji and Maitreya Rushi saw the svarup 
of Bhagvãn having four-arms, along with a shankh, a chakra, a gadã, a 
padma,  and  silk  garments.    Moreover, Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn was 
dark  in  complexion,  yet  His  beauty  is  described  as  being  capable  of 
putting millions of Kãm-Devs to shame. 
 
18.12
 “Therefore,  although Bhagvãn appears   to   be   like   a   human,   the 
previously  mentioned  luminosity  and  bliss  are  all  inherent  within 
Him.  A person who has the strengths of dhyãn, dhãrnã, and samãdhi, 
sees  that  very svarup of  having  the  light  of  millions  and  millions  of 
suns; such a person does not need to resort to using a torch or an oil 
lamp.    Moreover,  even  though Bhagvãn is  so  luminous,  the  fact  that 
this divine light cannot be seen is due to Bhagvãn’s wish.  If Bhagvãn 
wished, ‘May the bhaktas see me full of divine light’,  then  that  same 
svarup would be seen as luminous.  So, a person who has the nishchay 
in Bhagvãn realises, ‘The divya powers, riches, and pãrshads of the 
dhãms  of  Golok,  Vaikunth,  Shvet-Dvip,  and  Brahmpur,  all  accompany 
Bhagvãn.    Also,  the  bhaktas  who  serve  Him  include  Rãdhikã  and 
Lakshmi’.  He  sees Bhagvãn in  such  a  glorious  way.    However,  those 
who  are  fools  see  Him  as  a  human.   Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn has  also 
mentioned in the Geetã: 
 
avajãnanti mãm moodhã mãnusheem tanum-ãshritam 
param bhãvam-ajãnanto mama bhoota-maheshvaram 
Fools describe me as having a human svarup, but they do not realise my 
magnificent svarup as the great lord of all beings. 
 
“Therefore, those who are fools fail to realise such greatness of 
Bhagvãn; instead, they perceive human traits in Bhagvãn, seeing Him 
as a human like themselves. 
 
18.13
  “What is meant by perceiving human characteristics?  Well, it is when 
all  the  feelings of  the antah-karans,  like kãm, krodh, lobh, moh, mad, 
matsar, ãshã, trushnã; and all the characteristics of the physical body, 
like  bones,  skin,  faeces,  and  urine;  as  well  as  birth,  childhood,  youth, 
old age, and death; and all other human characteristics may appear to 

LOYÃ 
- 385 - 
have a nishchay in Bhagvãn, but his nishchay is flawed.  As a result, he 
will surely fall from satsang. 
 
18.14
 “That Bhagvãn’s svarup is  supremely divya – there  is  not  even  the 
slightest  trace  of  human  characteristics  in Bhagvãn,  and  a  person 
should  instead  not  perceive  human  traits  in Bhagvãn,  and  he  should 
instead  initially  view  Him  as  a dev;  then  he  should  view  Him  as 
Brahmã;  then  as Pradhãn-Purush;  then  as Prakruti-Purush;  then  as 
Akshar;  and  finally  as Purushottam.    For  example,  upon  seeing  the 
incredible charitras of Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn,  the  cow-herds  of Vraj 
initially  viewed  Him  as  a dev.    Then,  after  listening  to  the  words  of 
Garg-Ãchãrya, they viewed Him as Bhagvãn.  Then, they said, ‘You are 
Bhagvãn.      So,   show  us  your  dhãm’.  They   were   then   shown 
Akshardhãm.  A person who believes Bhagvãn to be divya in this way 
should be known to have to complete nishchay. 
 
18.15
 “Sometimes people say, ‘Initially, this person did not have the nishchay 
in  Bhagvãn,  but  now  he does’.  Does  that  mean  that  he  did  not  see 
Bhagvãn initially?    Well,  he  certainly  did  see  Him,  but  he  perceived 
human  characteristics  in  Him.    Later,  after  he  develops nishchay,  he 
does darshan believing Bhagvãn to   be   completely divya;   that   is 
known  as  having  developed  the nishchay in Bhagvãn.    Moreover, if  a 
person  does  not  believe Bhagvãn to  be  completely divya,  then  he 
repeatedly  becomes  upset  and  constantly  perceives gun and avgun.  
He thinks, ‘Bhagvãn is favouring that person, but not me’, or ‘He often 
calls that person, but not me’, or ‘He has more love for that person, and 
less for me’.  In this way, he continues perceiving gun and avgun.  As a 
result,  his  heart  becomes  more  and  more  miserable  day  by  day,  and 
ultimately he falls from satsang.  Therefore, a person should certainly 
not perceive human characteristics in Bhagvãn. 
 
18.16
 “A person should not perceive avgun even in the bhaktas of Bhagvãn.  
This is  because  physically  a bhakta may  be  blind, disabled,  deaf, old, 
unattractive, or he may have leukoderma; but when he dies, does he 
still remain blind or disabled in the dhãm of Bhagvãn?  Certainly not.  

LOYÃ 
- 386 - 
Those are all features of humans.  After leaving these features behind, 
he  assumes  a divya svarup and  becomes brahm-rup.    Therefore,  if  a 
person  should  not  perceive avgun in  the bhaktas of Bhagvãn,  then 
how can he possibly perceive them in Bhagvãn? 
 
18.17
 “Regardless  of  whether  you  understand  this  fact  today  or  you 
understand it after a hundred years, it must be understood.  In actual 
fact,  there  is  no  alternative  but  to  understand  it  and  remember  it 
firmly.    Therefore,  all bhaktas should  remember  this  principle  of 
mine  and  discuss  it  amongst  each  other.    Furthermore,  whenever 
someone suffers a setback due to some misunderstanding, he should 
be alerted by mentioning this.  A person should discuss this principle 
of mine regularly, at least once a day – this is my ãgnã.  So, please do 
not forget it; please, please, do not forget it!” 
 
18.18
 Saying  this,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  bid  “Jay  Swãminarayan”  to  all  the 
bhaktas and  returned  to  His  residence  smiling.    After  listening  to 
Shreeji Mahãrãj’s talk, all the sãdhus  and bhaktas realised  Shreeji 
Mahãrãj   is   the   cause   of   all avatãrs,   the ‘avatãri’,   and   greatly 
strengthened their nishchay in Him as being completely divya. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Loyã || 18 || 126 || 
 
 
|| End of Shree Loyã Prakaran ||

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 387 - 
|| SHREE SWÃMINÃRAYAN VIJAYTETRÃM || 
 
VACHANÃMRUT 
Shree Panchãlã Prakaran 
 
Panchãlã – 1 
The Happiness Of Akshardhãm 
 
1.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Fãgan  sud 4  [3
rd
 March  1821],  Shreeji 
Mahãrãj was sitting on a decorated bedstead that had been placed on 
a  platform  in  Jhinã-Bhãi’s darbãr in  Panchãlã.    He  was  wearing  a 
white angarkhu and a white khes.  He had tied a white feto around His 
head,  with  its  end  hanging  on  the  right  side.    He  had  also  covered 
Himself with a thin, white pachhedi.  A sabhã of paramhans, as well as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
1.2
 Then,   after   the sandhyã ãrti,   Shreeji   Mahãrãj sat   on   a   large, 
cylindrical pillow and said, “I wish to ask a question to all these 
senior paramhans and  senior bhaktas:    A  person  may  have  love  for 
Bhagvãn,  and  also  the  determination  to  follow dharma.    However,  if 
he  has  not  applied  a  thought  process,  then  the  extremely  attractive 
vishays (shabda, sparsh, rup, ras, and gandh) will never be considered 
equivalent   to   the   extremely   repulsive vishays;   nor   will   they   be 
considered  inferior  to  them.    So,  which  thought  must  be  applied  so 
that the extremely attractive vishays seem equivalent to or inferior to 
the  extremely  repulsive vishays?   I  ask  this  question  to  all  the senior 
bhaktas.    Whoever  has,  through  whichever  thought,  realised  the 
attractive vishays to be like the repulsive vishays, or has realised them 
to  be  far  more  repulsive  than  even  the  repulsive vishays,  please 
reveal your thoughts.” 
 
1.3
 Then, all the paramhans and all the bhaktas disclosed their thoughts. 
 
1.4
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Having heard your thoughts, I shall now 
tell  you  about  the  thought  which  I  have  maintained.    Consider  the 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 388 - 
following example:  If someone sends a letter from a distant land, the 
intelligence of the writer of that letter can be revealed by reading the 
letter.    Now,  the  appearance  and  style  of  speech  of  the  five  Pãndavs, 
Draupadi,   Kuntãji,   Rukmani,   Satyabhãmã,   Jambavati,   and   other 
queens of Bhagvãn, of Bhagvãn’s son, Sãmb, and of other bhaktas, are 
written in the shãstras.  By hearing those shãstras, the description of 
their  appearance  allows  us  to  visualise  them  as  if  having  direct 
darshan.    Also,  their  intelligence  can  be  revealed  from  the  words  of 
the shãstras.    In  the  same  way,  a  person  hears  from  the  Purãns,  the 
Mahãbhãrat,  and  other shãstras that Bhagvãn is  the  all-doer – is 
responsible  for  the  creation,  sustenance,  and  destruction  of  this 
universe – and  that  He  eternally  has  a svarup.    If  He  did  not  have  a 
svarup,  He  could  not  be called  the  all-doer.    Furthermore, Akshar-
Brahm is the dhãm in which Bhagvãn resides.  It is that Bhagvãn who 
has a divya murti; who is luminous and blissful; and who, at the time 
of creation, gives a buddhi, indriyas, a man, and prãns to the jeevs that 
had been merged in Mãyã along with their kãran bodies at the time of 
destruction.    Why  does  He  give  these  to  the jeevs?    He  does  so  to 
enable them to indulge in the uttam, madhyam, and kanishth types of 
vishays as well as for the purpose of attaining moksh. 
 
1.5
 “Bhagvãn has  created  enjoyments  and  places  of  enjoyment  for  the 
sake of those jeevs; but within that, the creation of the uttam vishays 
are  for  the  purpose  of  reducing  the  miseries  of  the  inferior vishays.  
For  example,  a  wealthy  merchant  may have  had  trees  planted  on 
both sides of a road to provide shade; he may have had water-houses 
constructed;  he  may  have  also  had  charity-houses  and  guest-homes 
constructed.    He  does  all  of  this  for  the  poor.    Similarly,  before 
Bhagvãn, Brahmã, Shiv, Indra, and  other devs are  as  poor  as  those 
paupers of Samvat 1847 who boiled the fruits of pipal trees and then 
ate  them.    It  is Bhagvãn who has  created  those uttam vishays for  the 
happiness of Brahmã and the other devs, and for humans.  Also, since 
the  rich  merchant  builds  facilities  for  the  sake  of  the  poor,  it  is 
obvious that compared to those, the luxuries in the merchant’s own 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 389 - 
home must be far greater.  Similarly, Bhagvãn has created happiness 
for Brahmã and  others;  so  it  is  obvious  to  an  intelligent  person that 
compared  to  those,  the  bliss  of  His  own dhãm must  be  far  more 
superior.    An  intelligent  person  can  then  conclude  that  there  is  an 
extreme  amount  of  bliss  in  the dhãm of Bhagvãn.    As  a  result,  the 
attractive vishays become repulsive for him. 
 
1.6
 “Furthermore, all  the  happiness  related  to vishays which is apparent 
in this world, be it for animals, humans, devs, or ghosts, is only due to 
some relation with Bhagvãn, and when the happiness is coupled with 
dharma.    However,  the  bliss  that  is  in Bhagvãn Himself  cannot  be 
found  anywhere  else.    Consider  the  following  example:    The  light 
from  this  burning  torch  which  falls  a  short  distance  away  is  not  as 
intense as the light in the vicinity of the torch.  Very far away, there is 
not light at all.  In the same way, elsewhere there is only a little bliss, 
but  absolute  bliss  is  only  available  in  the  vicinity  of Bhagvãn.    The 
further   a   person   is   distanced   from Bhagvãn,   the   less   bliss   he 
experiences.    Therefore,  a  person  who  is  a mumukshu realises, ‘The 
further  away  I am  from  Bhagvãn,  the  more  miseries  I  will  face,  and 
ultimately I will become extremely miserable.  On the other hand, even 
the  slightest  association  with  Bhagvãn  will  provide  immense  bliss.    I 
shall experience the highest form of bliss’.  A person who thinks in this 
way, keeps a desire for the bliss of Bhagvãn, and employs any means 
to   maintain   very   close   association   with Bhagvãn,   can   be   called 
intelligent. 
 
1.7
 “Moreover,  the  happiness  of  humans  exceeds  the  happiness  of 
animals; and the happiness of a king exceeds that; and the happiness 
of Indra exceeds  that;  then Bruhaspati’s happiness,  then Brahmã’s, 
then Vaikunth’s.  Beyond that, the happiness of Golok is superior, and 
finally, the bliss of Bhagvãn’s Akshardhãm is far more superior. 
 
1.8
 “In this way, realising  the  intensity  of  the  bliss  of Bhagvãn,  a  person 
who is intelligent realises all other pleasures related to vishays to be 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 390 - 
insignificant.    Compared  to  the  bliss  of Bhagvãn,  the  pleasures  of 
others  are  like  that  of  a  poor  man  who  begs  with  a  clay  pot  at  the 
door of a rich grahastha.  When I think of the bliss of the dhãm of that 
Bhagvãn, I become uninterested in all other forms of happiness, and I 
feel, ‘When will I leave this body to experience that bliss?’  Moreover, 
when  I  naturally  indulge  in  the panch-vishays,  I  think  about  no 
particular thought; but, if I were to sense some pleasure in an object, 
my thoughts would immediately be diverted to the bliss of Bhagvãn, 
and my mind would become extremely uninterested. 
 
1.9
 “These  thoughts  can  only  be  fully   realised   by  a   person   who   is 
intelligent.    In  fact,  I  have  love  towards  a  person  who  is  intelligent.  
This  is  because  I  myself  am  intelligent,  as  is  my  thought  process.  
Moreover, a person who is intelligent will also think similarly.  In this 
way,  it  appears  to  me  that  my  thought  is  superior  to  all  of  your 
thoughts;  therefore,  all  of  you  should  firmly  remember  this  thought 
of mine in your hearts.  Without applying this thought, if a person’s 
vrutti does  become  attached  to  appealing vishays,  it  will  only just 
become detached – and only after much effort.  However, for a person 
who   has   applied   this   thought,   very   little   effort   is   involved   in 
withdrawing  his vrutti;  he  can  easily  realise  how  worthless  the 
vishays are. 
 
1.10
 “This fact can only be understood by  a  person  who  has  a  sharp 
intelligence,  and  a  craving  for  higher  happiness.    For  example,  a 
penny  is  worth  more  than  a  cowry-shell,  and  a  rupee  is  worth  more 
than  a  penny;  a  gold  coin  is  more  valuable  than  a  rupee,  and  a 
chintãmani is  more  valuable  than a  gold  coin.    Similarly,  wherever 
there  are  pleasures  of  the panch-vishays,  the  bliss  of Bhagvãn in  His 
dhãm is  far  more  superior  in  comparison.    Therefore,  this  thought 
only settles in the heart of a person who is intelligent and who thinks 
in this way.  When this thought does firmly settle in the heart, even if 
he  happens  to  be  in  a  forest,  he  would  feel, ‘I am surrounded by 
countless people and the wealth of the kingdom’,  and  he  would  not 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 391 - 
believe himself to be miserable.  Conversely, if he were in Indra’s lok, 
he  would feel, ‘I am sitting in a forest’,  and  he  would  not  be  gratified 
by  the  pleasures  in  the lok of Indra.    In  fact,  he  would  realise  those 
pleasures to be worthless. 
 
1.11
 “Therefore, keeping this thought in mind, all of you should decide, 
‘Now we  want  to  reach  only  the  dhãm  of  Bhagvãn;  we  do  not  want  to 
be  tempted  by  the  worthless  pleasures  of  the  panch-vishays  along  the 
way’.  So, please keep this determination in your mind, as what I have 
told all of you is my principle; please embed it firmly in your lives.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Panchãlã || 1|| 127 || 
 
 
Panchãlã – 2 
Sãnkhya And Yog 
 
2.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Fãgan  sud 7  [10
th
 March, 1821],  Shreeji 
Mahãrãj was sitting on a decorated bedstead that had been placed on 
a  platform  in  Jhinã-Bhãi’s darbãr in  Panchãlã.    He  was  wearing  a 
white khes and  had  covered  Himself  with  a  white pachhedi.    He  had 
also tied a white feto around His head.  A sabhã of paramhans, as well 
as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
2.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Please bring the Moksh-Dharma shãstras 
so that we can arrange for a kathã on the chapter of Sãnkhya and the 
chapter of Yog.”  Then,  the shãstras were  brought  to  the sabhã,  and 
Nityãnand Swãmi commenced the reading. 
 
2.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “The followers of Yog consider jeev and 
ishvar to be the twenty-fifth tattva, and Paramãtmã to be the twenty-
sixth tattva.  On the other hand, followers of Sãnkhya include jeev and 
ishvar with  the  twenty-four tattvas,  and  consider Paramãtmã to  be 
the  twenty-fifth tattva.    Of  the  two,  the  followers  of  Yog  believe  that 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 392 - 
regardless  of  however  much  a  person  thinks  of  the ãtmã and  non-
ãtmã, or however much effort he makes, without accepting the refuge 
of pratyaksha  Bhagvãn,  he  cannot  attain moksh.    On  the  other  hand, 
followers   of Sãnkhya believe   that   if   a   person   understands   the 
ultimate  fate  of  all devs and  humans,  develops vairãgya for  the 
vishays, and realises his ãtmã as greater than the three bodies (sthul, 
sukshma, kãran),  then  he  becomes  a mukta.    However,  since  each  of 
these two types of beliefs has their own deficiencies, a person should 
employ   certain   methods   of   understanding   for   the purpose   of 
resolving those deficiencies. 
 
2.4
 “The flaw of the Yog philosophy is that both the jeev and ishvar have 
been considered as the twenty-fifth tattva and both have been said to 
have  bodies  comprised  of  twenty-four tattvas.    As  a  result,  both  the 
jeev and ishvar seem equal.  This would suggest that the sthul body is 
the same as virãt, the sukshma body is the same as sutrãtmã, and the 
kãran body  is  the  same  as avyãkrut.    It  also  suggests  that  the jãgrat 
state is the same as that of sustenance, the svapna state is the same as 
that   of   creation,   and   the sushupti state   is   the   same   as   that   of 
destruction.        Moreover, vishva, taijas,    and prãgna,    would    be 
considered  equal  to Vishnu, Brahmã,  and Shiv respectively.    As  a 
result,  those  followers  would  worship  the  twenty-sixth tattva with 
such understanding. 
 
2.5
 “To remove this deficiency of equating jeev and ishvar,  a  person 
should  learn  the  following  method  of  interpretation  from  a  wise 
person:    The  five bhuts residing  in  the  body  of ishvar are  known  as 
mahã-bhuts,  and  those bhuts sustain  the  bodies  of  all jeevs.    On  the 
other  hand,  the  five bhuts in  the  body  of  the jeev are  minor  and  are 
incapable   of  sustaining  others.      Also,   the jeev possesses   limited 
knowledge compared to ishvar, who is all-knowing.  A person should 
learn  such  a  method  of  interpretation so  that  the jeev and ishvar are 
not  understood  to  be  equal  to  each  other.    If  a  person  has  not  done 
that  and  some  opponent  were  to  ask  a  question  in  a  debate,  then  he 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 393 - 
would  find  it  difficult  to  reply.    As  a  result,  his  own  understanding 
would  become  confused.    But,  if  he  has  learnt  such  a  method,  then 
even if someone were to raise a question, he would not allow the jeev 
and ishvar to  be  considered  as  being  equal.    Also,  he  should  only 
listen to words that strengthen this belief. 
 
2.6
 “Next, the flaw of the followers of the Sãnkhya philosophy is that they 
consider Paramãtmã to  be  the  twenty-fifth tattva,  who  is  greater 
than  the  twenty-four tattvas.    They  consider  the  twenty-four tattvas 
as  being  false  and Paramãtmã as  being satya.    If  that  were  so,  who 
would attain that Paramãtmã?  After all, the jeev, who is the achiever, 
is not considered distinct from the tattvas.   
 
2.7
 “To  remove  that  deficiency,  a  person  should  learn  the  following 
method  of  interpretation  from  a  wise  person:   Jeev and ishvar have 
been  included  with  the tattvas because  those  twenty-four tattvas 
cannot  exist  without  the jeev and ishvar.    But,  in  reality, jeev and 
ishvar are  distinct  from  those tattvas, and  do  attain Paramãtmã.    A 
person  should  learn  such  a  method  of  interpretation.    If  he  has  not 
done so, and an opponent in a debate were to ask a question, doubts 
would  arise,  and  he  would  think, ‘If the tattvas are truly  false,  then 
what  is  the  purpose  of  prescribing  the  observance  of  dharma,  such  as 
brahm-chãrya,  and  spiritual  activities  such  as  shravan,  manan,  and 
nididhyãs, to attain Paramãtmã?’  Therefore, jeev and ishvar have 
been  included  with  the tattvas because  they  have  attained  oneness 
with the tattvas; however, they are totally distinct from those tattvas 
and  do  attain Paramãtmã.    In  this  way,  followers  of  the  Sãnkhya 
philosophy  should  learn such methods  of  interpretation  from  a  wise 
sãdhu. 
 
2.8
 “Moreover, the  followers  of  Yog  propose  the  following  methods: 
Moksh is  attained  by  performing dhyãn on  the pratyaksha murtis  of 
the avatãrs of Bhagvãn such   as Matsya, Kurma, Varãh, Nrusinh, 
Vãman, Rãm, and Krishna.  However, the followers of Sãnkhya accept 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 394 - 
methods  which  claim  that moksh is  attained  when  a  person  fully 
realises  the svarup of Bhagvãn,  through  experience,  as  described  by 
the various Shruti shãstras: 
 
yato vãcho nivartante aprãpya manasã saha 
From where speech returns along with the mind without having attained 
Bhagvãn. 
 
 “Both philosophies are good and have been accepted by the great, 
and  a  person  who  follows  both  of  them  appropriately  does  attain 
Akshardhãm.      In   both   of   these   philosophies,   the   same   spiritual 
activities have been prescribed, but the method of worship in each is 
not the same; in fact, it is extremely different.” 
 
2.9
 Having spoken in this way, Shreeji Mahãrãj then told the paramhans, 
“Now please sing kirtans.” 
 
2.10
 Then,  Muktãnand  Swãmi  and  some  other paramhans began  singing 
kirtans to the accompaniment of musical instruments.  Following this, 
Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Now, please stop the kirtans.    While  you  were 
singing,  I  thought  over  the  philosophies  of  both  Sãnkhya  and  Yog.  
Please listen as I explain. 
 
2.11
 “For a person who follows Yog, the luminous, divya  svarup  murti of 
Bhagvãn which resides in Akshardhãm at the time of ãtyantik-pralay 
is worthy of performing dhyãn upon.  Moreover, Bhagvãn in the form 
of Prakruti-Purush is also worthy of performing dhyãn upon, but to a 
lesser extent.  To a lesser extent than that, Bhagvãn in the form of the 
twenty-four tattvas, which have evolved from Prakruti-Purush, is also 
worthy  of  performing dhyãn upon.    To  a  lesser  extent  than  that, 
Hiranyagarbh;  and  to  a  lesser  extent  than  that, Virãt – who  has 
evolved  from  the  twenty-four tattvas – is  also  worthy  of  performing 
dhyãn upon.    Still  to  a  lesser  extent  than  that, Brahmã, Vishnu,  and 
Shiv, as well as the avatãrs of Bhagvãn on this earth, such as Matsya, 
Kurma, Nrusinh,  and Varãh,  as  well  as shãligrãm and  other murtis  of 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 395 - 
Bhagvãn – are  all  worthy  of  performing dhyãn upon.    While  I  was 
thinking, I realised that this is the essence of the philosophy of Yog. 
 
2.12
 “Then, I thought over the Sãnkhya philosophy.  They have done away 
with all  those svarups,  and  it appears  that  they  believe, ‘The cause of 
all thoughts is the jeev, and since there is nothing as pure as the jeev, it 
is appropriate to perform dhyãn upon the jeev’.    In  order  to  disprove 
this    view    of    Sãnkhya,    I    again thought    of   Yog.        Specifically, 
Purushottam Bhagvãn,  who  is  greater  than  everything,  has  an anvay 
relationship   with Prakruti and Purush and   all   other   entities.  
Therefore,  they  are  all Bhagvãn;  all  possess  a divya svarup;  all  are 
satya and  worthy  of  performing dhyãn upon.    Certain  Vedic shloks 
also support this fact:   
 
sarvam khalvidam brahma 
The whole universe is brahm, the svarup of Bhagvãn. 
 
neha nãnãsti kinchana 
There is nothing in this universe that is not the svarup of Bhagvãn. 
 
idam hi vishvam bhagavãn-ivetaro yato jagat-sthãna-nirodha-sambhavãha 
This universe is as another svarup of Bhagvãn – who is the cause of the 
creation, sustenance, and destruction of the world. 
 
2.13
 “Therefore, a mumukshu who  follows  the  path  of  Yog  encounters  no 
obstacles.      This   is   because   that   path   is   easy   and   relies   on   the 
pratyaksha murti of Bhagvãn.    For  this  reason,  through  that  path, 
even an ordinary person can attain kalyãn without any difficulty. 
 
2.14
 “However, there is one flaw on that path:  Entities, such as Prakruti 
and Purush,  are  thought  of  as  being  the  components  of Purushottam 
Bhagvãn.    This  could  cause  the  following  belief  to  develop: Prakruti 
and Purush are  components  of Bhagvãn,  and  their  components  are 
Hiranyagarbh and Virãt.  If such an understanding develops, then that 
is  a  major  flaw  since  a  person  feels Bhagvãn is  divisible  and  has 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 396 - 
components.    However, Bhagvãn is  indivisible,  without  components, 
unchanging,     imperishable,     and     whole.          Therefore,     such     a 
misunderstanding should not be allowed to arise. 
 
2.15
 “Also, a person should understand, ‘Bhagvãn is one and unparalleled, 
while others, such as Prakruti and Purush, are His bhaktas and perform 
dhyãn  upon  Him.    That  is  why  they  are  referred  to  as  svarups  of 
Bhagvãn.  Just as a great sãdhu who performs dhyãn upon Bhagvãn is 
known  as  a  svarup  of  Bhagvãn,  in  the  same  way  Prakruti  and  Purush 
are  also  svarups  of  Bhagvãn.    Moreover,  Purushottam  Shree  Krishna, 
who is greater than everything, Himself assumes the forms of Vãsudev, 
Sankarshan, Pradyumna, and Aniruddha, and assumes avatãrs such as 
Ram and Krishna.  Therefore, He is worthy of performing dhyãn upon’.  
If  a  person  has  such  an  understanding,  then  that  path  of  Yog  is 
absolutely free of obstacles and is the best path. 
 
2.16
 “Now, the flaw of the Sãnkhya philosophy is that it claims, ‘All that is 
grasped via the antah-karans and the indriyas is false, while all that is 
grasped through experience is satya’.    Therefore,  they  propose  all 
svarups as being false.  Along with that, they also consider the svarups 
of Bhagvãn that have  incarnated  for  the kalyãn of the jeevs,  as  being 
false.    In  fact,  they  also  view  the svarups of Aniruddha, Pradyumna, 
and Sankarshan as  being  false.    They  only  accept Vãsudev,  who  is 
nirgun.  That is their major flaw. 
 
2.17
 “Therefore,  it  suits  the  followers  of  Sãnkhya  to  believe, ‘After 
absorbing  the  thoughts  of  Sãnkhya  and  considering  whatever  has 
evolved from Prakruti and Purush as being perishable, a person should 
realise  his  own  ãtmã  as  being  distinct  from  all,  as  being  pure,  and 
brahm-rup.    Then,  understanding  the  svarup  of  Bhagvãn  that  has 
incarnated for the kalyãn of the jeevs as being satya, he should perform 
dhyãn upon Him’.    In  this  way,  these  two  types  of  thoughts  can  be 
known  if  a  person  learns  from  someone  who  is  wise,  like  myself; 
otherwise,  even  if  a  person  studies  or  listens  to  the shãstras,  he 
cannot understand them. 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 397 - 
2.18
 “In reality, the teachings of Yog are actually for a person who has 
become brahm-rup by initially having practiced thoughts of Sãnkhya.  
Therefore, it is said: 
 
brahma-bhutaha prasannãtmã na shochati na kãnkshati 
samaha sarveshu bhuteshu mad-bhaktim labhate parãm 
A person who has become brahm-rup remains joyful, grieves nothing, desires 
nothing, behaves equally with all beings, and attains my supreme bhakti. 
 
ãtmãrãmash-cha munayo nirgranthã apyurukrame 
kurvantya-haitukeem bhakti-mittham-bhuta-guno hariha 
Despite being engaged only in the ãtmã, and despite having overcome all 
improper natures – the munis still offer selfless bhakti to Bhagvãn, as Bhagvãn 
possesses such divya qualities. 
 
parinishthitopi nairgunya uttam-shloka-leelayã 
gruheeta-chetã rãjarshe ãkhyanam yad-adheetavãn 
O King (Parikshit)!  Despite being perfectly poised in the nirgun state, having 
been attracted by the leelãs of Bhagvãn, I (Shukdevji) studied the Shreemad 
Bhãgvat. 
 
2.19
 “In this way, the Sãnkhya philosophy is dependent on Yog.  This is 
because  through  that  Sãnkhya  philosophy,  the  followers  of  Sãnkhya 
realise all vishays that can be indulged in via the five indriyas and four 
antah-karans – which are distinct from a person’s own ãtmã – to  be 
totally  worthless.    Therefore,  such  a  person  is  not  tempted  by  any 
objects, nor does he become attached to them.  Moreover, if someone 
were  to  say  to  him, ‘This object is extremely pleasurable’,  he  would 
think, ‘It may be pleasurable, but it is perceived through the indriyas 
and  antah-karans;  and  that  which  the  indriyas  and  antah-karans 
perceive is asatya and perishable’.  This is the firm understanding of a 
follower of Sãnkhya, who also realises his own ãtmã as pure.  Such a 
person  should  perform dhyãn, upãsanã,  and  offer bhakti to Bhagvãn 
according to the path of Yog.  If he does not adopt this, that would be 
a major flaw in him. 
 
2.20
 “In this way, I have described the eternal philosophies of the Sãnkhya 
shãstras and the Yog shãstras having thoroughly thought about them.  

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 398 - 
However,  the  followers  of  Yog  and  Sãnkhya  have  corrupted  both 
paths.    Those  who  are  followers  of  Yog  try  to  establish  the  truth  of 
svarups,  and  in the  process  they  realise  all  people,  the svarups of 
Brahmã, Vishnu,  and Shiv,  as  well  as svarups of Rãm, Krishna,  and 
other avatãrs as  equal  to  each  other.    Followers  of  Sãnkhya  criticise 
all svarups, and in the process they also criticise places of pilgrimage, 
vrat, murtis, yam and niyam, forms of dharma such as brahm-chãrya, 
as  well  as Brahmã, Vishnu,  and Shiv,  and Rãm, Krishna,  and  other 
avatãrs.    Therefore,  both  the  followers  of  Sãnkhya and  the  followers 
of  Yog  have  deviated  from  the correct  path.    As  a result,  they  will  be 
sent to Narak.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Panchãlã || 2 || 128 || 
 
 
Panchãlã – 3 
Intelligence Is Instrumental In Attaining Kalyãn 
Love Is Mãyã 
 
3.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Fãgan  sud 8  [11
th
 March, 1821],  Shreeji 
Mahãrãj was sitting on a decorated bedstead in Jhinã-Bhãi’s darbãr in 
Panchãlã.    He  was  wearing  a  white khes and  had  covered  Himself 
with a white pachhedi.  He had also tied a white feto around His head.  
A sabhã of paramhans, as well as a sabhã of haribhaktas from various 
places, had gathered before Him. 
 
3.2
 Then,   Shreeji   Mahãrãj said   to   the paramhans,  “Please  begin  a 
question-answer discussion.” 
 
3.3
 Then,  Muni  Bãvã asked Brahmãnand Swãmi, “We have attained this 
satsang,  as  well  as  the  association  of Bhagvãn.    All  other  flaws  have 
been eradicated, and we also have enthusiasm to do satsang.  Despite 
this, why do mãn and irshyã still remain?” 
 
3.4
 Brahmãnand Swãmi then began to supply an answer, but was unable 
to do so satisfactorily. 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 399 - 
3.5
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Such a person lacks intelligence.  This is 
because a person who is intelligent realises all of his gun and avgun, 
as well as the gun and avgun of others.  On the other hand, a person 
who  is  not  intelligent  only  acknowledges  his  own gun,  but  fails  to 
realise  his avgun;  he  feels  himself  to  be  as  distinguished  as  the 
Sanakãdik,  and  he  views  other  renowned  people  to  be  inferior  to 
himself.  However, a person who is intelligent realises his own avgun, 
and  thinks ‘I possess many avgun.  Then,  maintaining  an  intense 
hatred  towards  those avgun,  he  eradicates  them.    Also,  if  a sãdhu 
were to speak to him about eradicating those avgun, he would accept 
that advice as beneficial.  As a result, avgun, such as mãn and irshyã, 
will not remain in him.  
 
3.6
 “On the other hand, someone may appear to be very intelligent, but if 
he  does  not  recognise his  own  flaws,  then  his  intelligence  should  be 
known to be merely worldly.  Outwardly, that intelligence appears to 
be very sharp, but he cannot be called intelligent.  Actually, he should 
be  known  to  be  an  utter  fool,  and  his  intelligence  is  useless  for 
attaining  his  own moksh.   In  comparison,  someone  else  may  possess 
only  a  little  intelligence,  but  if  he  attempts  to  eradicate  his avgun 
after recognising them, then even his limited intelligence is useful in 
attaining moksh.  In fact, only he can be called intelligent.  Therefore, 
a  person  who  never  perceives  his  own avgun and  perceives only  his 
own gun should be known as a fool; and a person who acknowledges 
his own avgun should be known to be intelligent.” 
 
3.7
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj instructed, “Now, please sing kirtans.”  The 
paramhans then  commenced  singing ‘Sakhi  Ãj  Mohan  Deethã  Re, 
Sheriye Ãvta Re...’.” 
 
3.8
 Following this, Shreeji Mahãrãj spoke again, “Now, please stop the 
singing.    The kirtans that  you  have  just  sung  are  full  of  love.    While 
you were singing, I thought about the nature of love, and realised that 
love   is   a   great   quality;   and   to   worship Bhagvãn with   love   is 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 400 - 
admirable.    After  deep  thought,  I  realised, ‘Love itself is the mãyã of 
Bhagvãn’.   This  is  because  if  two  women  are  casually  talking  to  each 
other,  looking  at  each  other,  or  casually  touching  each  other,  then 
that  is  a  different  type  of  love.    Or,  if  two  men  are  talking  to  each 
other,  looking  at  each  other,  or  casually  touching each  other,  then 
that is also a different type of love.  However, if a man is looking at a 
woman,   embracing   her,   listening   to   her   talks,  and   enjoying   her 
fragrance, then the love and mental attraction he develops for her is a 
type  of  love  that  does  not  develop  between  two  men.    Also,  if  a 
woman  is  looking  at  a  man  and  embracing  him,  then  the  love  she 
develops for him through his association, with her mind being totally 
attracted   towards  him,  is  a   type   of   love   that  does   not   develop 
between  two  women.    Therefore,  that  which  is  the  cause  of  the 
continuance  of  the  world,  and  the  cause  of  bondage  and  the  cycle  of 
births  and  deaths,  is  the mãyã of Bhagvãn,  which  takes  the  form  of 
love. 
 
3.9
 “Then, I thought, ‘Shabda, sparsh, rup, ras, and gandh are  the  panch-
vishays.    After  having  regarded  everything  else  as  perishable,  if  those 
vishays are directed only towards Bhagvãn, realising Him to be the only 
source of ultimate bliss, then that is fine – that is not mãyã’.  But, then I 
thought  that  even  that  is  not  appropriate.    After  all,  if  a  person 
perceives shabda,  sparsh,  rup,  ras,  and  gandh,  to  be  better  in  other 
objects  compared  to  those  that  are  in Bhagvãn,  he  will  abandon 
Bhagvãn and will develop love for other objects.  For example, Shree 
Krishna Bhagvãn’s 16,100 wives, who were apsãrãs in past lives, had 
asked  for  the  following vardãn from Brahmã:   ‘O Mahãrãj!  We have 
experienced  the  touch  of  devs,  demons,  and  humans,  but  we  have  not 
experienced  the  touch  of  Bhagvãn  as  our  husband.    Therefore,  please 
grace  us  so  that He becomes our  husband’.    So, Brahmã replied, 
‘Perform  tap  and  Bhagvãn  will  become  your  husband’.      So,   they 
performed intense tap, after which Ashtãvakra Rushi and Nãrad Muni 
both  became  pleased  and  granted  the  following vardãn:   ‘Bhagvãn 
will  become  your husband’.    In  this  way,  by  performing  many tap in 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 401 - 
other   lives,   they   attained Shree   Krishna Bhagvãn.      However,   on 
perceiving  more  beauty  in  Sãmb  than  in Bhagvãn,  they  became 
infatuated  by  Sãmb.    Therefore,  it  is  not  appropriate  for  a  person 
whose  mind  is  not  steady  to  develop  love  for Bhagvãn through  the 
pleasures  of  the vishays of  the  five indriyas.  However, if a person’s 
mind  does  remain  steady,  without  having  any  doubts,  then  it  is 
appropriate. 
 
3.10
 “Moreover,  a  person  who  is  intelligent  should  develop   love   for 
Bhagvãn in  the  following  way:    A  person  should  realise  his jeev as 
being distinct from the twenty-four tattvas.  Then, after uprooting the 
vruttis of  the  five indriyas that  are  firmly  embedded  in  the jeev,  and 
while remaining as the jeev alone (without vruttis of the indriyas) he 
should  remain nirgun and  develop  as  much  love  for Bhagvãn as 
possible. 
 
3.11
 “What do I mean by nirgun?  Well, the ten indriyas are the products of 
rajo-gun; the antah-karans and their presiding devs are the products 
of sattva-gun;   and   the   five bhuts and   the panch-vishays are   the 
products  of tamo-gun.    A  person  who  believes  himself  to  be  distinct 
from   the   products   of   those   three gun and   from   the   three gun 
themselves, and remains as the jeev alone, is known as nirgun.  So, he 
should  become nirgun in  this  way  and  develop  love  of Bhagvãn.  
Therefore, it is said: 
 
nairgunyasthã ramante sma gunãnu-kathane hareha 
Although the munis had attained the nirgun state, they still engaged 
themselves in praising the glory of Bhagvãn.  
 
parinishthitopi nairgunya uttam-shloka-leelayã 
gruheeta-chetã rãjarshe ãkhyanam yad-adheetavãn 
O King (Parikshit)!  Despite being perfectly poised in the nirgun state, having 
been attracted by the leelãs of Bhagvãn, I (Shukdevji) studied the Shreemad 
Bhãgvat. 
 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 402 - 
3.12
 “Those who possess gnãn after  having  realised  the  nature  of  the 
kshetra and  the kshetragna attain ãtmã-nishthã and  develop  love for 
Bhagvãn.      What   is   the kshetra?      Well,   the   three   bodies   (sthul, 
sukshma, and kãran) and the three mental states (jãgrat, svapna, and 
sushupti),  are  the kshetra.    Such  a  person  realises  the kshetra to  be 
distinct from his own ãtmã, and he feels, ‘Those can never be any part 
of me; I am the knower; I am extremely pure, formless, genderless, and 
chetan, while the kshetra is extremely impure, jad, and perishable’.  
Understanding  this  firmly,  a  person  who  develops vairãgya towards 
everything   else,   and   offers bhakti to Bhagvãn while   following 
svadharma,  is  known  to  possess ekãntik bhakti and gnãn.    A bhakta 
possessing this gnãn is superior to all.  In fact, Bhagvãn has said: 
 
teshãm gnãnee nitya-yukta eka-bhaktir-vishishyate 
priyo hi gnãnino tyartha-maham sa cha mama priyaha 
Of these – a person who is distressed from having fallen from the path of 
attaining siddh-dashã, and therefore still wishes to attain them; a person who 
seeks knowledge of the ãtmã; a person who desires material objects, material 
pleasures and powers; and a person who has gnãn – the person with gnãn is 
the best, as he is always engaged in me and is devoted to me alone.  I am 
exceedingly dear to a person with gnãn, and he is dear to me. 
 
udãrãha sarva evaite gnãnee tvãtmaiva me matam 
They are all noble, but I consider the one with gnãn to be my very ãtmã. 
 
3.13
 “Realising this, a person should uproot the indriyas, the antah-karans, 
and  the vishays from  the jeev,  and  develop  love  for Bhagvãn – only 
that  is  appropriate.    As  long  as  a  person  has  not  uprooted  them,  he 
should extract work from them in the form of the darshan or touch of 
Bhagvãn.    Moreover,  they  should  not  be  regarded  as  supporters; 
instead, they should be regarded as enemies.  In fact, a person should 
never feel gratitude towards them by thinking, ‘They are beneficial to 
me in offering bhakti to Bhagvãn’.    He  should  not feel  that  the  eyes 
enable a person to listen to the kathã of Bhagvãn; the skin enables a 
person  to  experience  the  touch  of Bhagvãn;  the  nose  enables  a 
person  to  experience  the  fragrance  of Bhagvãn’s mãlã and tulsi;  the 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 403 - 
mouth enables a person to engage in kathãs and sing kirtans in praise 
of Bhagvãn; and the tongue enables a person to experience the taste 
of Bhagvãn’s prasãd.    A  person  should  not  understand  them  to  be 
helpful  in  performing bhakti of Bhagvãn.    They  should  not  be  given 
gratitude,   nor   should   they   be   trusted.      Instead,   they   should   be 
regarded  only  as  enemies.    This  is  because  what  if  in  the  process  of 
experiencing  happiness  through  the darshan or  touch  of Bhagvãn, 
they lure a person to believe that there is pleasure in the darshan or 
touch  of  women  and  other  objects?    That  would  be  very  damaging.  
Therefore,  those  enemies  (the  five indriyas)  should  be  confined,  and 
work  in  the  form  of bhakti to Bhagvãn should  be  extracted  from 
them.    For  example,  a  king  who  has  captured  his  enemy  keeps  him 
chained and extracts work from him; never does the king free him or 
trust him.  If he were to free him or trust him, then the enemy would 
definitely  kill  the  king.    In  the  same  way,  if  a  person  trusts  his 
enemies  (the indriyas),  and  frees  them  and  does  not  keep  them 
confined, they will definitely make him fall from the path of Bhagvãn.  
Therefore, they should never be trusted. 
 
3.14
 “Also, just as the British arrest a criminal and keep him standing in a 
witness  box  to  question him,  without  freeing  him or  trusting  him,  in 
the same  way,  the indriyas and  the antah-karans should  be  kept in  a 
witness  box  and  in  chains  (the niyams of  the panch-vartmãn),  and 
then they should be made to offer bhakti to Bhagvãn.  However, they 
should  not be  given  any  gratitude;  they  should  be  looked  upon  only 
as  enemies.    If  the indriyas and  the antah-karans are  regarded  as 
supporters,  given  gratitude,  and  seen  to  be  useful  in bhakti,  then  in 
the process of experiencing the happiness of the darshan or touch of 
Bhagvãn,   they   will   lure   a   person   to   believe   that   there   is   some 
pleasure  in  women  and  other  objects.    As  a  result,  all  efforts  he  has 
made  will  become  useless.    For  example, if  one spark  of  fire  were  to 
fall  on  a  large  pile  of  gunpowder,  then  that  gunpowder  would  be 
completely reduced to ashes.  In this way, the stability of a person’s 
indriyas is not certain. 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 404 - 
3.15
 “Therefore, it is only appropriate that a person develops love for 
Bhagvãn while  behaving  as  the ãtmã.    That  is  my  principle,  and  a 
person who  develops  love  for Bhagvãn in  this  way  is  dear  to  me.  
Moreover,  he  should  think, ‘The beauty of Bhagvãn cannot be found 
anywhere  else;  the  touch  of  Bhagvãn  cannot  be  found  anywhere  else; 
the bliss experienced from hearing Bhagvãn cannot be found anywhere 
else; and the tastes related to Bhagvãn cannot be found anywhere else’.  
In this way, a person should tempt the indriyas and the antah-karans, 
and  divert  them  away  from  other vishays.    This  understanding  is 
appropriate.” 
 
3.16
 Then,  Svayamprakãshãnand  Swãmi said, “Mahãrãj, in which place 
should a person stay and develop all these thoughts?” 
 
3.17
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A person should think:  ‘I am not the sthul 
body,  the  sukshma  body,  or  the  kãran  body;  I  do  not  have  the  jãgrat, 
svapna,  or  sushupti  states;  I  am  not  the  five  gnãn-indriyas,  the  five 
karma-indriyas, the four antah-karans or their presiding devs; in fact, I 
am distinct from all these.  I am chaitanya; I am a bhakta of Bhagvãn’.  
If the indriyas and antah-karans misbehave in some way, they should 
be  disciplined  in  the  following  way:   ‘Do you wish to see the beauty 
only  of  Bhagvãn,  or  do  you  also  wish  to  see  the  beauty  of  others?    Do 
you  wish  to  listen  to  sounds  related  only  to  Bhagvãn  and  experience 
smells related to Him, or do you also wish to listen to other sounds and 
experience  other  smells?    If  you  do  crave  after  the  vishays  leaving 
Bhagvãn aside, then what is there between you and me?  Who are you 
and who am I?  I will have absolutely nothing to do with you.  Whatever 
you do, you will have to bear the consequences’. 
 
3.18
 “Lecturing the indriyas and antah-karans in this way, a person should 
pray  to Bhagvãn:   ‘O Mahãrãj!  O Swãmi!  You intensely love your 
bhaktas!    You  are  an  ocean  of  mercy!    The  fault  lies  with  the  indriyas 
and  antah-karans.    I  am  distinct  from  them.    In  fact,  they  are  my 
enemies.  So, please protect me from their influence’.  A person should 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 405 - 
constantly  offer  prayers  in  this  way;  and  understanding  his  own 
kshetragna to  be  composed  of chaitanya,  he  should  offer  love  and 
bhakti to Bhagvãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Panchãlã || 3 || 129 || 
 
 
Panchãlã – 4 
Perceiving Divinity In The Human Traits Of Bhagvãn 
 
4.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Fãgan  vad 3  [21
st
 March, 1821], Shreeji 
Mahãrãj was sitting on a decorated bedstead that had been placed on 
a  platform  in  Jhinã-Bhãi’s darbãr in  Panchãlã.    He  was  wearing  a 
white khes and  had  covered  Himself  with  a  white pachhedi.    He  had 
also  tied  a  white feto around  His  head.    In  addition  to  this,  He was 
turning  a mãlã of tulsi beads  in  His  hand.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as 
well as haribhaktas from various places, was gathered before Him. 
 
4.2
 Then,   Shreeji   Mahãrãj said   to   the paramhans,  “Please  begin  a 
question-answer discussion amongst yourselves.” 
 
4.3
 Then, Muni Bãvã asked a question to Brahmãnand Swãmi, “Initially, a 
person may have the belief of Bhagvãn and may engage in bhajan and 
smaran;  but  later,  on  seeing  the  human-like  actions  of Bhagvãn, 
doubts arise in that belief.  What is the cause of this?” 
 
4.4
 Brahmãnand  Swãmi  then  began  to  answer  that  question  but  was 
unable to do so satisfactorily. 
 
4.5
 Then,  having  thought  for  some  time,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj spoke, “I shall 
answer that question.”  Continuing, He said, “The Veds, the Purãns, 
the  Mahãbhãrat, the  Smrutis,  and  the  other shãstras state  that  the 
original svarup of Bhagvãn, which is eternal, without a beginning, and 
divya,  resides  in  His Akshardhãm.    They  also  mention  what  that 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 406 - 
Bhagvãn is like.  His svarup is not like any svarup that can be seen by 
the  eyes;  His  sound  is  not  like  any  sound  that  can  be  heard  by  the 
ears;  His  touch  is  not  like  any  touch  that  can  be  felt  by  the  skin;  His 
smell  is  not  like  any  smell  that  can  be  smelt  by  the  nose;  and  the 
tongue cannot describe that Bhagvãn.  He cannot be imagined by the 
man;  He  cannot  be  thought  of  by  the chitt;  He cannot  be  understood 
by  the buddhi;  nor  can  the ahankãr fully  claim, ‘I am Bhagvãn’s and 
Bhagvãn is mine’.  In this way, Bhagvãn remains beyond the reach of 
the indriyas and the antah-karans. 
 
4.6
 “Moreover, the beauty of Bhagvãn is such that it cannot be compared 
to  any  other  object  in  this brahmãnd – including  everything  from 
Brahmã to  the  smallest  blade  of  grass;  His  sound  is  such  that  it 
cannot be compared to any other sounds in this brahmãnd; The smell 
of Bhagvãn is  such  that  it  cannot  be  compared  to  any  other  smell  in 
this brahmãnd;  The  touch  of Bhagvãn is  such  that  it  cannot  be 
compared to any other touch in this brahmãnd; The tastes related to 
Bhagvãn are such that they cannot be compared to any other taste in 
the brahmãnd;  and  the dhãm of Bhagvãn is  such  that  it  cannot  be 
compared to any other place in this brahmãnd.  Specifically, out of all 
the   various   places   in   the   seven dvips and   the   nine khands,   the 
extremely beautiful places of Brahmã and others on Mount Meru, the 
various  places  on  Mount  Lokã-Lok,  the loks of Indra, Varun, Kuber, 
Shiv,  and Brahmã,  and  many  other  places,  not  one  of  them  can 
compare  to  the dhãm of Bhagvãn.    The  bliss  experienced  by  the 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn residing  in  that dhãm is  such  that  it  cannot  be 
compared to any other type of bliss in this brahmãnd. 
 
4.7
 “The svarup of that Bhagvãn is such that it cannot be compared to the 
svarup of anyone in this brahmãnd.  This is because all the svarups in 
this brahmãnd which  evolved  from Prakruti  and  Purush are mãyik, 
whereas Bhagvãn is divya.  So, since the two are totally different, how 
can  they  possibly  be  compared?    For  example,  we  can  compare  a 
person to something by saying, ‘This man is like a buffalo, like a snake, 
like  a  sparrow,  like  a  donkey,  like  a  dog,  like  a  crow,  or  like  an 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 407 - 
elephant’.    But  in  reality,  such  comparisons  are  not  appropriate  for 
humans.    This  is  because  all  of  those  animals  are  in  a  completely 
different  group  compared  to  humans.   Even  between  a  human  and  a 
human,  there  is  no  exact  similarity  where  a  person  can  claim, ‘This 
person is exactly like that person’.    If  he  were  exactly  like  the  other 
person, then how could the original person be recognised? 
 
4.8
  “Therefore, despite the fact  that  all  humans  belong  to  the  same 
group,  no  two  are  exactly  alike.    Just  look  at  Bhago  and  Mulo – the 
two are said to be identical; but, if a person stays with them for a few 
days, he can distinguish between them and say, ‘This is Bhago and this 
is   Mulo’.      But,   if   there   were   no   difference,   how   could   they   be 
recognised?    So,  if  there  is  no  great  similarity  between  that  which  is 
mãyik and that which is not mãyik, what can possibly be compared to 
Bhagvãn and  the dhãm of Bhagvãn?    After  all,  all shãstras claim, 
‘Bhagvãn is beyond the reach of the indriyas and the antah-karans’. 
 
4.9
 “When that Bhagvãn does not wish to give His darshan to beings, He 
stays in this way in His own Akshardhãm with a divya svarup, and as a 
result He remains beyond reach.  That Bhagvãn is the lord of all lords, 
He  is  surrounded  by  countless divya luxuries  and  countless divya 
pãrshads, and He is the lord of countless millions of brahmãnds. 
 
4.10
 “Take  the  example  of  a  great  world-emperor   whose   kingdom 
stretches from where the sun rises to where it sets.  This emperor, by 
the  strength  of  his  own tap, has  attained divine powers  like  those  of 
the devs, and is ruling over the loks of Svarg, Mrutyu-Lok, and Pãtãl – 
just like Arjun, who remained on the throne of Indra in Svarg-Lok for 
many  years  with  his  own  body,  and  Nahush  Rãjã,  who  also  became 
Indra.  The emperor is so powerful, that it is not possible to count the 
villages in his kingdom, as they are innumerable.  The chiefs of these 
villages   also   cannot   be   counted,   as   they   are   also   innumerable.  
Furthermore, the countless chiefs of those villages come to his darbãr 
to  make  requests.    The  emperor’s  money,  property,  pleasures, 
palaces, and wealth are also countless.   

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 408 - 
4.11
 “Just like the emperor, Bhagvãn is  the  king  of  the  kings  of  countless 
villages   (brahmãnds).      Moreover,   the   chiefs   of   those   villages 
(brahmãnds) are Brahmã, Vishnu, and Shiv.  Just as in one village one 
chief  is  senior  and  the  whole  population  of  that  village  bows  before 
him  and  follows  his ãgnã,  and  just  as  the  chief  in  turn  bows  before 
the  king,  similarly,  in  each brahmãnd,  Brahmã, Vishnu,  and Shiv are 
senior,  and  the  others  in  that brahmãnd,  that  are  the devs,  demons, 
humans, rushis, and prajãpatis of  that brahmãnd,  worship  them  and 
follow  their ãgnã.    But, Brahmã, Vishnu,  and Shiv in  turn  worship 
Purushottam Bhagvãn and  follow  His ãgnã.    Furthermore,  all  the 
Brahmãs, Vishnus,  and Shivs of  all  the brahmãnds pray  to Bhagvãn, 
‘Mahãrãj!  Please have compassion on us and visit our brahmãnd’ – just 
as  the  chief  of  a  village  requests  the  world-emperor, ‘Mahãrãj!  I am 
poor.  Please visit my house.  I shall serve you to the best of my ability’.  
In   the   same   way, Brahmã, Vishnu,   and Shiv pray   to Bhagvãn, 
‘Mahãrãj!  Please have mercy upon us and grace us with your darshan; 
visit our brahmãnd’.    Only  then  does Bhagvãn assume  a  body  in  that 
brahmãnd. 
 
4.12
 “Moreover, He assumes a body based on the task to be performed 
there, and He also behaves accordingly.  If He assumes the body of a 
dev, then He behaves exactly like a dev.  If He assumes the body of an 
animal,  then  He  behaves  exactly  like  an  animal.    For  example,  when 
Bhagvãn assumed   the svarup of Varãh,   He   found   the   earth   by 
smelling  it.  When  He  became Hayagriv,  He  started  to  neigh  like  a 
horse.    When  He  assumed  the  bodies  of  water  creatures,  such  as 
Matsya and Kurma,  He  moved  only  in  water,  but  not  on  land.    When 
He became the svarup of Nrusinh, He behaved exactly like a lion, not 
like a human. 
 
4.13
 “When  that Bhagvãn assumes  the svarup of  a  human  being,  He 
behaves  exactly  like  a  human.    During Satya-Yug,  the  lifespan  of 
humans is one hundred thousand years, so Bhagvãn also lives for one 
hundred  thousand  years.    Also,  just  as  people  in Satya-Yug can 
indulge  in  any  object  their  mind  desires, Bhagvãn also  indulges  in 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 409 - 
objects  in  the  same  way;  He  does  not  behave  in  any  extraordinary 
way.  In Tretã-Yug, the lifespan of humans is ten thousand years.  So, 
when Bhagvãn is  born  in Tretã-Yug,  He  also  lives  for  ten  thousand 
years.    In Dvãpar-Yug,  the  lifespan  of  humans  is  one  thousand  years, 
and  humans  possess  the  strength  of  ten  thousand  elephants.    So, 
Bhagvãn also possesses the same strength and has the same lifespan.  
Finally,  when Bhagvãn is  born  in Kali-Yug,  He  assumes  the  lifespan 
and strength of humans according to the humans of Kali-Yug. 
 
4.14
 “Just as a child is conceived, then develops in the womb, then is born, 
then  undergoes  the  phases  of  childhood,  youth,  and  old  age,  and 
eventually  dies, Bhagvãn also  undergoes  the  same  process,  exactly 
like a human.  Also, just as humans possess svabhãvs –  such as kãm, 
krodh, lobh, svãd, mãn, sneh, mad, matsar, irshyã, moh, ãshã, trushnã, 
hatred, attachment, infatuation, happiness, misery, fear, fearlessness, 
bravery, cowardice, hunger, thirst, sleep, prejudice, a feeling that this 
belongs to others, a feeling that this belongs to me, tyãg, vairãgya – in 
the same way, all of those svabhãvs are apparent in Bhagvãn when He 
assumes  a  human  body.    All  the shãstras have  also  described  that 
human svarup of Bhagvãn along  with  His  original, divya svarup.    A 
person,  who  has  developed  a  firm nishchay of  both  of  those svarups 
through intense shravan and manan,  never  has  any  doubts;  whereas 
a  person  who  lacks  this  type  of  understanding  does  have  doubts 
about Bhagvãn. 
 
4.15
 “When that Bhagvãn – who  possesses  a divya svarup – assumes  a 
human body, He behaves with svabhãvs similar to humans.  However, 
an intelligent person realises, ‘He possesses kãm, but it is not like that 
of  other  humans.    In  fact,  krodh,  lobh,  svãd,  mãn, and  other  human 
svabhãvs  are  also  present  in  Bhagvãn,  but  they  are  certainly  not  like 
those possessed by other humans’.    An  intelligent  person  also  realises 
that  there  is  something divya about  that Bhagvãn,  and  with  this 
understanding,  he  develops  the  belief  of  Him  being Bhagvãn.    For 
example, Shankar-Ãchãrya entered the body of a king in order to gain 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 410 - 
knowledge of certain affectionate details.  Therefore, at that time, his 
bodily  gestures  and  his  emotions  were  all  affectionate  like  those  of 
the  king.    However,  the  queen  was  intelligent  and  realised, ‘My 
husband  did  not  possess  such  powers;  therefore,  some  other  jeev  has 
entered  his  body’.    In  the  same  way, divya qualities  are  apparent  in 
Bhagvãn in   human svarup.      As   a   result,   a   person   develops   the 
nishchay in Him being Bhagvãn. 
 
4.16
 “Then you may say, ‘If someone develops the nishchay in Bhagvãn  on 
noticing  something  divya,  then  if  He  were  to  display  divya  qualities, 
many people would develop the same belief’.  However, the fact of the 
matter is as follows:  All the shãstras refer to the sun by saying, ‘It is 
Bhagvãn’.  Moreover, that sun is visible to everyone, and people do its 
darshan daily.  Despite this, no person has ever been convinced of his 
or her own kalyãn as a result of its darshan, and they do not believe, ‘I 
have attained kalyãn’.  On the other hand, after having the darshan of 
Rãm, Krishna,  and  the  other avatãrs in  human svarup,  and  of Nãrad, 
Shukji, and other sãdhus, people do attain the belief that my kalyãn is 
certainly  guaranteed,  and  I  am  fulfilled.    Even  though  there  is  no 
divine light in that Bhagvãn and those sãdhus, and a person can only 
have   their darshan after   lighting   an   oil   lamp,   he   still   becomes 
convinced of his own kalyãn. 
 
4.17
 “Consider another example:  Fire is also a visible svarup of Bhagvãn, 
as Bhagvãn has said: 
  
aham vaishvãnaro bhootvã prãninãm deha-mãshritaha 
prãnãpãna-samãyuktaha pachãmyanam chaturvirdham 
Remaining in the bodies of all being as Vaishvanar (the fire of digestion), I 
digest the four types of food (chewable, drinkable, lickable, and suckable) with 
the help of prãn vãyu (inhaled air) and apãn vãyu (air that pushes food 
downwards). 
 
4.18
 “The darshan of  that  fire  is  available  to  all,  but  that  does  not  grant 
people  belief  of  their  own kalyãn,  whereas  with  the darshan of 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 411 - 
Bhagvãn and His sãdhu, they do gain belief of their own kalyãn.  The 
reason for this is that there is a difference between humans, and the 
sun and fire; as a result, a person is not convinced of his kalyãn upon 
having  the darshan of  the  sun  or  fire.    Instead,  if  someone  touches 
fire,  he  will  be  burnt.    Furthermore,  when  Kuntãji  called  upon Surya 
using the mantra given by Durvãsã, Surya came to Kuntãji in a human 
svarup just like Kuntãji’s own svarup.    As  a  result,  she  was  able  to 
enjoy his intimacy, and therefore conceived Karna.  In actuality, Surya 
is extremely luminous; and if he had come with all of his light, Kuntãji 
would have been burnt to death, and she would not have been able to 
enjoy his intimacy.  Also, when Surya used to come to Satrãjit Yãdav, 
he came as a human.  However, when he came to Kuntãji and came to 
Satrãjit, did he leave his place in the sky?  He remained in the sky; but 
assuming  another svarup,  that  very  same Surya came  to  Kuntãji  and 
Satrãjit.  Moreover, there was just as much luminosity in that svarup 
as there is in the sun, but he suppressed that luminosity and came as 
a human. 
 
4.19
 “In the same way, if Bhagvãn were to give darshan to beings with all 
of  His divya qualities,  then  humans  would  not  find  it  suitable,  and 
they  would  wonder, ‘Is this a ghost, or what?’  Therefore, Bhagvãn 
suppresses  His  own divya powers  and  gives darshan exactly  like  a 
human.    But,  at  the  same  time,  He  still  remains  present  in  His  own 
dhãm.    Only  when Bhagvãn comes  as  a  human  are  people  able  to  do 
His darshan, touch Him, and offer the nine types of bhakti. 
 
4.20
 “If Bhagvãn does not become like a human and instead behaves with 
complete divya qualities,  then  people  would  not  be  able  to  develop 
love  or  feelings  of  friendship for  Him.    This  is  because  a  human 
develops   love   and friendship   for   another   human,   and   animals 
develop  mutual  love  and  friendship for  other  animals;  but  humans 
and  animals  do  not  develop  the  same  love  and  friendship  for  each 
other.    Therefore,  those  belonging  to  the  same  group  develop  love 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 412 - 
towards  each  other,  but  not  towards  those  belonging  to  a  different 
group. 
 
4.21
 “Similarly, Bhagvãn suppresses   His divya qualities   and   becomes 
exactly like a human so that His bhaktas can develop love for Him.  He 
does  not  exhibit  His divya qualities.    Exhibiting  His divya qualities 
would place Him in a different group, and as a result, bhaktas would 
not be able to develop love and friendship towards Him.  It is for this 
reason  that  when Bhagvãn appears  in  human svarup,  He  remains 
extremely cautious  to  ensure  that  His divya qualities  remain  hidden.  
However,  if  He  were  to  become  a  little  impatient  in  some  task,  His 
divya qualities would  become  apparent.    Occasionally,  by  His  own 
wish, He may reveal His divya qualities to some bhakta.  For example, 
as Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn became  impatient  to  kill  Bhishma,  He 
forgot his human-like nature and reverted to His divya powers.  As a 
result,  the  earth  was  incapable  of  bearing  the  burden.    When  He 
revealed His divya qualities to Arjun, it was revealed as a result of His 
own wish.  However, Arjun did not experience bliss due to that divya 
qualities,  and  he  become  very  uneasy.    Then,  when Shree  Krishna 
Bhagvãn gave darshan to   Arjun   in   His   human svarup,   Arjun 
experienced bliss and said: 
 
drusht-vedam mãnusham rupam tava saumyam janãrdana 
idaneem-asmi samvruttaha sachetãha prakrutim gataha 
Vanquisher of the evil (Krishna)!  Having seen your gentle human svarup, I am 
now calm and have been restored to my original nature. 
 
4.22
 “Therefore, a person only finds it suitable when Bhagvãn behaves 
like  a  human;  otherwise  he  would  not.    Yet,  when Bhagvãn behaves 
as  a  human,  a  person  who  does  not  have  this  understanding  would 
find   it   difficult   to   accept   His   human-like   nature.      Moreover,   if 
Bhagvãn were to behave with only divya qualities, a person would be 
unable  to  understand  all  that  is  beyond  the  reach  of  the  mind  and 
speech.  For this reason, the shãstras have described Bhagvãn in both 
ways.    A  person  who  has  fully  realised  Him  in  this  way  would  not 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 413 - 
develop  any  doubts;  but,  doubts  would  certainly  arise  in  a  person 
who does not understand in this way. 
 
4.23
 “Someone may claim, ‘I have realised Bhagvãn, and I have nishchay in 
Bhagvãn’.  But, if he has not understood this talk, then his nishchay is 
still  imperfect.    For  example,  a  person  may  have  learnt  a shlok or  a 
kirtan.    If  he  were  asked, ‘Have you learnt this shlok or kirtan?’ he 
would reply that he has, and he would also be able to recite it.  But, if 
he were to forget that shlok or kirtan after a few days, then it can be 
said  that  when  he  originally  learnt  the shlok,  he  had  not  learnt  it 
properly.  This is because that shlok or kirtan was not fully imprinted 
in his jeev through intense practice, and through shravan and manan.  
However,  if  something  is  learnt  in  childhood  thoroughly,  then  it  can 
be recalled when required, even during youth or old age.  In the same 
way,   when   that   person   attempted   to   develop   the nishchay in 
Bhagvãn,   some   deficiencies   remained.      If   no   deficiencies   had 
remained, and if he had done shravan, manan, and intense repetition 
in his jeev, then he would never have had any doubts at all.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Panchãlã || 4 || 130 || 
 
 
Panchãlã – 5 
Pride And Humility 
 
5.1
 In the Samvat year 1877, on Fãgan vad 8 [27
th
 March, 1821], Shreeji 
Mahãrãj was sitting on a decorated bedstead that had been placed on 
a  platform  in  Jhinã-Bhãi’s darbãr in  Panchãlã.    He  was  wearing  a 
white khes and  a  warm,  red dagli.    He  had  also  tied  a  white feto 
around  His head.   In  addition  to  this,  He had covered  Himself  with a 
white chãdar.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from 
various places, has gathered before Him. 
 
5.2
 Then, Svayamprakãshãnand Swãmi asked a question:  “When is pride 
appropriate,  and  when  is  it  not  appropriate?    When  is  humbleness 
appropriate, and when is it not appropriate?” 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 414 - 
5.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “It is appropriate to have pride before a 
person  who  spites satsang,  or  speaks  offensively  of Bhagvãn or  His 
great sant.    If  someone  does  speak  offensively,  a  person  should 
retaliate  with  words  as  sharp  as  an  arrow;  but  in  no  way  should  he 
become   humble   before   a vimukh.      In   such   a   situation,   that   is 
appropriate.    On  the  other  hand,  it  is  not  appropriate  to  have  pride 
before Bhagvãn or   His sant.      Before   them,   putting   pride   aside, 
behaving   as   a dãs of   a dãs,   and   becoming   humble,   is   the   only 
appropriate behaviour.” 
 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Panchãlã || 5 || 131 || 
 
 
Panchãlã – 6 
Those With Firm Upãsanã Attain Kalyãn 
 
6.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on  the  night  of Fãgan  vad 9  [28
th
 March, 
1821],  Shreeji  Mahãrãj was sitting  on  a decorated bedstead  that had 
been placed on a platform of Jhinã-Bhãi’s darbãr in Panchãlã.  He was 
wearing a warm, red dagli along with a white angarkhu.  He had also 
tied a white feto around His head.  In addition to this, He was wearing 
a  white khes and  had  covered  Himself  with  a  thin,  white  cloth.    A 
sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had 
gathered before Him. 
 
6.2
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “I  thought for  quite  some  time,  and 
having  mentally  skimmed  through  all  the shãstras,  it  has  become 
apparent  that  there  has  not  been  any avatãr as  powerful  as Shree 
Krishna.        This    is    because Shree    Krishna has    exhibited    the 
characteristics of all of His other countless svarups within Himself. 
 
6.3
 “Firstly, after Devki gave birth to Him, He gave darshan in  a  four-
armed svarup holding  a shankh,  a chakra,  a gadã,  and  a padma, 
thereby  revealing  in  Himself  the  characteristics  of  the  husband  of 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 415 - 
Lakshmi, Bhagvãn.  To His mother Yashodã, He showed the Vishvarup 
form   in   His   own   mouth,   which   revealed   the   characteristics   of 
Aniruddha in Himself through His thousand-headed svarup.  He gave 
darshan to   Akrur   in   the   river   Yamunã,   thereby   revealing   the 
characteristics  of  Shesh-Shãyi.    He  showed  the Vishvarup form  to 
Arjun on the battlefield: 
 
pashya me pãrth rupãni shata-shotha sahastra-shaha 
O Son of Pruthã (Arjun).  Behold my hundreds and thousands of divine 
svarups. 
 
“Shree  Krishna showed   countless brahmãnds and   revealed   the 
characteristics of Purushottam.  
 
6.4
 “Moreover, Shree Krishna has said: 
 
yasmãt-ksharama-teeto-hama-ksharãd-api chottamaha 
atosmi loke vede cha prathitaha Purushottamaha 
I am greater than all that is perishable, and I am greater than even the 
imperishable. Therefore, I am known in the Smrutis and Veds as 
‘Purushottam’. 
 
“In this way, He revealed Himself as Purushottam.    Also,  He  was  the 
Shree Krishna who resides in Golok with Rãdhikã. 
 
6.5
 “When Shree  Krishna went  to  retrieve  the brãhman’s son,  He  gave 
darshan to  Arjun  as  Bhumã-Purush.    It  was Vãsudev,  who  resides  in 
Shvet-Dvip who Himself assumed that avatãr.  Moreover, throughout 
the  Mahãbhãrat  and  the  Shreemad  Bhãgvat, Nãr-Nãrãyan has  been 
referred  to  as  that Shree  Krishna Himself.    Therefore,  the murtis, 
strength,  and divya powers  of  that  same Bhagvãn,  which  reside  in 
that avatãr of Shree   Krishna in   various   ways,   are   complete.  
Therefore,   that avatãr was   very   great.      After   all,   other svarups 
possessed a few divya powers, whereas Shree Krishna was filled with 
all divya powers.    Therefore,  there  is  no avatãr like  the avatãr of 
Krishna;  that avatãr reigns  as sarvopari.    Only  some  powers  have 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 416 - 
been  revealed  through  the  other avatãrs.    However,  this avatãr has 
revealed all divya powers and strengths.  Therefore, this avatãr is the 
greatest of all. 
 
6.6
 “If a person has a firm belief of the pratyaksha Shree  Krishna in  this 
way,  and  if  that  belief  never  changes  in  any  way,  then  even  if  he 
happens to disobey an ãgnã due to the influence of kusang, he would 
not  fall  from  the  path  of kalyãn;  he  would  certainly  attain kalyãn.  
Therefore, if all of you paramhans and haribhaktas also develop such 
firmness  of  the upãsanã of Bhagvãn in  this  way,  then  even  if  you 
happen  to  slightly  disobey  an ãgnã,  you  will  still  ultimately  attain 
kalyãn.” 
 
6.7
 Hearing  this talk,  all  the sãdhus  and haribhaktas realised  Shreeji 
Mahãrãj as the cause of all, which strengthened their upãsanã. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Panchãlã || 6 || 132 || 
 
 
Panchãlã – 7 
The ‘Mãyã’ Of A Magician 
   
7.1
 In the Samvat year 1877, about two-and-a-half hours after sunrise on 
Fãgan  vad 11  [29
th
 March,  1821],  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a 
decorated  bedstead  that  had  been  placed  on  a  platform  in  Jhinã-
Bhãi’s darbãr in  Panchãlã.    He  was  wearing  a  warm,  red dagli and  a 
white khes.    He  had  also  tied  a  white feto around  His  head.    In 
addition  to  this,  He  had  covered  Himself  with  a  white pachhedi.    A 
sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had 
gathered before Him. 
 
7.2
 In  the sabhã,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj had  Nityãnand  Swãmi  read  a  passage 
from  the  first skandh of  the  Shreemad  Bhãgvat.    The  first shlok he 
read was: 
 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 417 - 
janmãdyasya yatah-nvayad-itaratash-chãrtheshvabhignaha svarãt 
tene brahma  hrudã ya ãdikavaye muhyanti yat-soorayaha 
tejo-vãri-mrudãm yathã vinimayo yatra trisargo mrushã 
dhãmnã svena sadã nirasta-kuhakam satyam param dheemahi 
 
7.3
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj Himself  began  to  explain  the  meaning  of  the 
third  line  of  that shlok: “A person should realise  that  the  entities 
evolved  out  of  the  three gun of Mãyã,  which  are  the  five bhuts,  the 
indriyas,   the antah-karans,   and   their   presiding devs,   are   never 
present  in Bhagvãn at  any  time – past,  present,  or  future.    Also,  a 
person   should   interpret   the   last   line   as   the shlok,   as   follows:  
Bhagvãn,  via  His  own svarup (dhãm), destroyed  the  deception  (the 
products  of mãyã).    This  is  the  supremely satya svarup of Bhagvãn.  
Moreover,    just    as    the svarup of Bhagvãn in Akshardhãm is 
magnificent with countless divine powers and divine light at the end 
of ãtyantik-pralay, a person should realise exactly the same regarding 
pratyaksha  Bhagvãn in  human svarup.    A  person  who  realises  this  is 
said to have known Bhagvãn perfectly. 
 
7.4
 “However, when a foolish person looks at pratyaksha Bhagvãn with a 
mãyik vision, he sees a human like himself.  Also, just as he himself is 
born, becomes a child, becomes a youth, becomes old and dies, in the 
same way,  he  believes Bhagvãn to  undergo  the  same  process.    But, 
when  he  worships Bhagvãn with  the  sincerity,  having  faith  in  the 
words  of  the ekãntik  sant of Bhagvãn,  his mãyik vision  disappears.  
Then,  a  person  realises  that  same svarup of Bhagvãn as  being  the 
supreme chaitanya,  which  is sachidãnand.    The  Shreemad  Bhãgvat 
also mentions: 
 
sa veda dhãtuha padaveem parasya duranta-veeryasya rathãnga-panehe 
yo-mãyayã santa-tayãnu-vruttya bhajeta tat-pãda-saroja-gandhama 
He who, having become free from mãyã, serves the holy feet of Bhagvãn, will 
constantly follow His wishes, and attain the state of Bhagvãn – who holds a 
chakra in His hand, has infinite powers, and is the supporter of the universe. 
 
7.5
 “The phases of childhood, youth, and old age apparent in Bhagvãn, as 
well  as  His  birth  and  death,  are  all  seen  due  to  His  extraordinary 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 418 - 
powers of creating an illusion.  In reality, Bhagvãn remains absolutely 
unchanged.      For   example,   a   skilled  magician   arms  himself   with 
weapons  and  ascends  to  the  sky  to  fight  against  the  warriors  of  the 
demons – the  enemies  of Indra.    Then,  having  been  cut  to  pieces,  he 
falls to the ground.  Then, the magician’s wife gathers those pieces 
together  and  burns  herself  on  his  funeral  pyre.    After  a  short  while, 
the magician appears out of the sky, armed with weapons, exactly as 
he appeared before.  He then asks the king for a reward and requests, 
‘Please  return  my  wife’.        Having    seen    such    an    astonishing 
performance, if a person is unable to comprehend the ‘mãyã’ of even 
a  magician,  how  then  can  the  extraordinary  powers  of Bhagvãn 
possibly  be  comprehended?    A  person  who  does  comprehend  that 
‘mãyã’ of the magician, realises:  ‘That magician has not died, nor has 
he been burnt.  In reality, he is exactly the same as he was before’.  In a 
similar  way,  a  person  who  is  said  to  have  realised  the svarup of 
Bhagvãn perfectly,    understands Bhagvãn to    be    eternal    and 
imperishable, and absolutely  unchanging.    For  example,  when Shree 
Krishna Bhagvãn left  His  body,  Rukmani  and  the  other  wives  of 
Bhagvãn took His body and burnt themselves along with Him.  At that 
time,  the  ignorant  people  thought, ‘Now He is dead’.    On  the  other 
hand,  those  who  possessed gnãn,  thought, ‘He has disappeared from 
here and has gone elsewhere’.    They  understood Bhagvãn as  being 
eternal.  As a result, Shree Krishna Himself has said: 
 
avajananti mãm moodha mãnusheem tanum-ãshritam 
param bhãvam-ajãnanto mama bhoota-maheshvaram 
Fools mock me as having a human svarup, but they do not realise my divya 
svarup as the great lord of all beings. 
 
7.6
 “So,  if  a  fool  understands Bhagvãn as   being sãkãr,   then   he 
understands  Him  as  being  merely  like  a  human;  or  he  understands 
Bhagvãn as  being nirãkãr so  that  He  is  not  considered mãyik like 
other mãyik svarups.    In  this  way,  a  fool  misunderstands on  both 
accounts. 
 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 419 - 
7.7
 “But, if Bhagvãn did not have a svarup, then what about the fact that 
Shrutis  have  said  that  during ãtyantik-pralay, ‘sa ikshata’, meaning, 
‘That Bhagvãn saw...’.  If Bhagvãn ‘saw’, then He had to have a svarup, 
possessing eyes, ears and other organs.  Moreover, it is said:   
 
purushenãtam-bhootena veeryamã-dhatta veeryavãnã 
Purushottam became the svarup of Purush and impregnated Mãyã.  
 
“Therefore, Bhagvãn has always had a svarup. 
 
7.8
 “Moreover,  when  that Purushottam Nãrãyan takes  the svarup of 
Purush for  some  task,  that Purush is  hidden  by  the  divine  light  of 
Purushottam, and only Purushottam remains.  In the same way, when 
Purushottam takes the form of Mãyã, that Mãyã is also hidden by the 
divine light of Purushottam, and only Bhagvãn remains in that svarup.  
Then, Bhagvãn takes  the svarup of maha-tattva,  then  the svarups of 
others  evolved  from maha-tattva,  then  the svarup of Virãt,  then  the 
svarup of Brahmã and  others  created  from  that Virãt-Purush,  and 
then   the svarup of Nãrad and   the Sanakãdik.      In   this   way,   in 
whomever  that Purushottam Bhagvãn ‘enters’ for the purpose of 
fulfilling many types of tasks, He hides that entity by His own divine 
light, and He Himself reigns supreme through that entity.  Moreover, 
in whomever He resides, He suppresses their own light and displays 
His own divine light – just as when fire enters iron, it suppresses the 
quality  of coldness  and  the  black colour  of  that  iron,  and  exhibits its 
own quality.   
 
7.9
 “Also, when the sun rises, the light from all the stars and the moon, 
merges  into  its  own  light,  and  only  the  sun’s light remains.  In the 
same way, Bhagvãn overpowers the light of whoever He ‘enters’ and 
exhibits   His   own   divine   light   to   a   greater   degree.      Then,   after 
completing  that  task  for  which  He  had  ‘entered’  that  entity,  He 
separates  from  the  entity;  and  the entity  remains  as  it  was  before.  
Therefore,  the  additional  powers  that  the  entity  appeared  to  have 
should be known to actually be the power of Purushottam Bhagvãn. 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 420 - 
7.10
 “In this way, the pratyaksha Purushottam Nãrãyan is the cause of all; 
He  is  forever divya and  is sãkãr.    A  person  should  not  perceive  any 
type  of  imperfections in  that murti – it  is  like  a murti made  of sãkar.  
Also,  he  should  perform dhyãn, bhajan,  and  offer bhakti only  to  the 
murti that  he  has  seen.    Furthermore,  whichever  human  traits  seem 
apparent in that Bhagvãn should be understood to be like the ‘mãyã’ 
of  a  magician.    A  person  who  has  such  an  understanding  does  not 
develop delusion for that Bhagvãn in any way. 
 
7.11
 “These talks can be understood by a person with the following firm 
belief:   ‘Even at the time of ãtyantik-pralay,  Bhagvãn  and  His  bhaktas 
remain  in  Akshardhãm,  where  the  bhaktas  enjoy  divya  bliss,  having 
attained  a  divya  murti.    Moreover,  the  murti  of  that  Bhagvãn  and  the 
svarups   of   the   bhaktas   of   Bhagvãn   possess   divine   light   that   is 
equivalent to the light of countless suns and moons’.    Only  a  person 
with such firm understanding is able to understand these talks. 
 
7.12
 “Also, that Bhagvãn – who has a luminous and divya murti – becomes 
like  a  human  out  of  compassion,  to  give kalyãn to  the jeevs  and  to 
allow  those jeevs  to  offer  the  nine  types  of bhakti to  Him;  and    He 
always does so with all of His strength, divine powers, and pãrshads.  
Even  then,  those  who  realise  this  complex  truth  understand  the 
human svarup of Bhagvãn on this  earth  as  being  exactly  the  same  as 
the svarup of Bhagvãn residing in Akshardhãm – they do not feel that 
there is even a slight difference between that svarup and this svarup.  
A  person  who  has  known Bhagvãn in  this  way  can  be  said  to  have 
known Bhagvãn perfectly.    For  him, mãyã can  be  said  to  have  been 
eradicated.    A  person  who  realises  this  is  called  a bhakta with gnãn 
and  an ekãntik bhakta.    Moreover,  if  by  chance  a  person  possessing 
such    firm upãsanã of pratyaksha    Bhagvãn were    to    behave 
inappropriately due to the influence of kusang or due to the influence 
of his own prãrabdha karmas, even then he would attain kalyãn.  On 
the other hand, a person who has doubts in realising Bhagvãn in this 
way, even if he is a strict urdhvaretã naishtik brahm-chãri and a great 
tyãgi, attaining kalyãn would still be extremely difficult for him. 

PANCHÃLÃ 
- 421 - 
7.13
 “If a person has, from the beginning, developed a firm belief that 
Bhagvãn is sãkãr even at the end of ãtyantik-pralay, and if he were to 
listen  to shãstras describing Bhagvãn as  being  merely  full  of  divine 
light and nirãkãr, or if he were to hear such talks from someone, even 
then  he  would  not  have  doubts.    This  is  because  he  has  realised, 
‘Bhagvãn is eternally sãkãr and is never nirãkãr.  Furthermore, that 
very  Bhagvãn  assumes  different  murtis, such as Rãm and Krishna’.  A 
person  with  such  firm  understanding  should  be  known  to  have 
perfect nishchay.” 
 
7.14
 In  this  way,  for  the  purpose  of  enlightening  His bhaktas,  Shreeji 
Mahãrãj talked  about  the  unparalleled nishchay of  His  own svarup.  
On  hearing  this,  all  the paramhans and bhaktas strengthened  their 
nishchay in Shreeji Mahãrãj’s svarup as described. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Panchãlã || 7 || 133 || 
 
 
|| End of Shree Panchãlã Prakaran ||

GADHADÃ II 
- 422 - 
|| SHREE SWÃMINÃRAYAN VIJAYTETRÃM || 
 
VACHANÃMRUT 
Shree Gadhadã Madhya Prakaran 
 
Gadhadã II – 1 
The Elimination Of Moh 
 
1.1
 In  the Samvat year  1877,  on Jyeshth sud Punam [15
th
 June  1821], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   the   veranda 
outside   the   west-facing   rooms   in   front   of   the mandir of Shree 
Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was 
wearing  a  white khes and  had  covered  Himself  with  a  white chãdar.  
He  had  also  tied  a  white pãgh around  His  head,  and  was  wearing  a 
garland  of  white  flowers.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas 
from   various   places,   had   gathered   before   Him.      Some   of   the 
paramhans were  singing kirtans to  the  accompaniment  of  a jhãnjh 
and mrudang. 
 
1.2
 Shreeji   Mahãrãj   then   said   to   the paramhans who   were   singing 
kirtans,  “Please  stop  singing  for  the  time  being,  and  conduct  a 
question-answer discussion.” 
 
1.3
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi bowed to Shreeji Mahãrãj with folded hands 
and asked, “Mahãrãj, what is that nature of moh?  Also, how can moh 
be eliminated?” 
 
1.4
 After thinking for a short while, Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “It seems 
that  a  feeling  of  illusion  which  often  appears in  the  mind  is  the  very 
nature of moh.  When moh intensifies in a person’s heart, the illusion 
in  his  mind  also  intensifies.    He  then  loses  all  sense  of  judgment  of 
what should be done and what should not be done. 
 
1.5
 “In fact,  just today, I  was  thinking  about  the  reason  behind the 
development  of moh.    Last  night,  I  awoke  in  the  middle  of  the  night 

GADHADÃ II 
- 423 - 
and  slept  facing  north.    Upon  seeing  the  Dhruv  Star,  the  following 
thought  arose:   ‘This is the northern Dhruv, but the shãstras also 
mention a southern Dhruv.  Where could that be?’  Then,  I  looked  for 
the southern Dhruv  and I  saw  it  as  well.    Just  as  there is  a  pulley for 
drawing  water  from  a  well,  I  saw  a  similar  large  pulley  between  the 
two  Dhruv  stars.    The  tips  of  the  two  supports  of  the  wheel  were 
touching  the  Dhruv  stars,  just  as  wooden  pillars  are  held  up  by  iron 
rods hammered between them.  Also, just as a rope is wound around 
a rope-wheel which is studded with brass ornaments, similarly, I saw 
the positions of all the stars, the devs, and the nine planets, arranged 
around  that  rope-wheel.    I  also  saw  the  sun  and  moon  rise  and  set 
from  the  same  direction.    Then,  looking  within,  I  saw  that  all  things 
that   are   in   the brahmãnd are   also   all   in   the  body.      I   saw   the 
kshetragna that resides in the body.  I also saw Purushottam Bhagvãn, 
who  resides  within  that kshetragna.    On  seeing  that Bhagvãn,  my 
vrutti became so deeply engrossed in His svarup, that returning out of 
samãdhi seemed  impossible.    But,  a bhakta then  came  near  and 
prayed to me.  It was only out of compassion that I was able to return 
into this body. 
 
1.6
 “Then, the following thought arose in my mind:  ‘I was able to return 
from  samãdhi  due  to  compassion,  but  what  could  be  the  reason  for 
others coming out of samãdhi?’  It seemed to me that they come out of 
samãdhi because there is still an attachment for some vishays. 
 
1.7
 “Therefore, the panch-vishays are the cause of moh.  Moreover, there 
are three levels of those vishays – uttam, madhyam, and kanishth.  Of 
these,   if   a   person   who   has   obtained uttam   vishays encounters 
someone  who  obstructs  him  from  them,  then  that  person  becomes 
angry with him.  From that anger, moh develops. 
 
1.8
 “Generally, the ears have a constant relationship with sounds, and 
the skin has a constant relationship with touch.  In this way, the five 
gnãn-indriyas are  related  to  the vishays.  Therefore,  if  a  person  who 

GADHADÃ II 
- 424 - 
has casually seen an object wishes to break his vrutti from that object 
and  keep it  focused on  the svarup of Bhagvãn instead,  then  no effort 
is  required;  his vrutti would  become  detached  quite  easily  from  the 
vishays and remain on the svarup of Bhagvãn.  On the other hand, if a 
person has seen an extremely charming object, such as a woman, and 
his vrutti has  become  fixed  on  that,  then even  if  he  attempts  to  keep 
this vrutti on Bhagvãn’s svarup, it will not stay there; and nor will his 
chitt remain  steady.    Therefore,  as  long  as  the chitt is  attracted  by 
charming vishays, moh cannot  be  eradicated.    Moreover,  if  a sant,  or 
his guru,  or  his ishta-dev (Bhagvãn)  criticises  a vishay which  has 
attracted his chitt, he would become upset with them and even insult 
them;   he   would   not   be   able   to   accept   their   words.      Such   an 
experience in a person’s heart should be known as moh.  In addition, 
Bhagvãn has said in the Geetã: 
 
dhyãyato vishayan-punsaha sanga-steshu-pajãyate 
sangat-sanjãyate kãmaha kãmãt-krodho-bhijãyate 
krodhãd-bhavati sammohaha sammohãt-smruti-vibhramaha 
smruti-bhranshãd-buddhi-nãsho bhudhi-nashãt-pranashyati 
A person thinking about the sense objects develops attachment toward them. 
From the attachment, desires develop; from the desires, anger develops; from 
anger, delusion develops; from delusion, confusion of the mind develops; from 
confusion of the mind, loss of buddhi develops; and as a result of the loss of 
buddhi, he perishes. 
 
 “These  words  spoken  by Shree   Krishna   Bhagvãn are   universal 
principles.    When  the chitt is  attracted  to vishays,  no  matter  how 
intelligent  a  person  may  be,  his buddhi becomes  unstable  and  he 
becomes   like   an   animal.      Therefore, moh is   generated   due   to 
attachment to the vishays. 
 
1.9
 “Now, if a person  who  wishes  to  detach  his chitt from  those vishays, 
he  should  firstly  strengthen  his  knowledge  of  the ãtmã – ‘I am the 
ãtmã, not this body’.    Secondly,  he  should  understand  the  nature  of 
how  the  universe  is  created,  sustained,  and  destroyed.    Thirdly,  he 
should  thoroughly  understand  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn.    He  should 

GADHADÃ II 
- 425 - 
think, ‘The panch-vishays  have  been  created  by  Bhagvãn;  therefore, 
there must be much more bliss in Bhagvãn than there is in them.  How 
is  that?    Well,  sounds  contain  only  pleasures  related to  sounds;  the 
pleasures of the other four types of vishays cannot be found in sounds’.  
In the same way, only the pleasures of touch and no other vishays can 
be  found  in  touch.    Similarly,  only  the  pleasures  of  sight  exist  in 
sights.  The same applies for tastes and smells in that only their own 
pleasures  exist,  but  the  pleasures  of  all  the panch-vishays cannot  be 
experienced in just one vishay. 
 
1.10
 “On the other hand, in Bhagvãn’s svarup,  all  pleasures  exist  at  the 
same time.  Therefore, even if a bhakta only has darshan, he still feels 
totally  satisfied.    Similarly,  touch  and  other  types  of  contact  with 
Bhagvãn also make His bhaktas feel totally fulfilled.  Also, the worldly 
pleasures  related  to vishays are  all  perishable,  whereas  the  bliss 
related  to Bhagvãn is  everlasting.    Such  thoughts  of  the  greatness  of 
Bhagvãn should  be  strengthened.    So,  attachment  to  the vishays is 
eradicated through these three types of thoughts. 
 
1.11
 “When attachment to the vishays is  eradicated,  a  person  no  longer 
makes  distinctions  between  pleasant  and  unpleasant vishays – an 
ugly  woman  appears  the  same  as  a  beautiful  woman.    In  the  same 
way,  he  sees  everything – animals,  birds,  wood,  dung,  stones,  and 
gold – to be the same; he is not infatuated on seeing a pleasant object.  
This is how he views the panch-vishays; and no distinctions between 
pleasantness and unpleasantness remain in his mind.  A person who 
behaves like this is known to be free of moh.  Shree Krishna Bhagvãn 
has also mentioned this in the Geetã: 
 
sama-loshtãshma-kãnchanaha 
He who regards a lump of earth, a stone, and gold as equal, is said to be 
gunãtit. 
 
1.12
 “A person with such characteristics has realised Bhagvãn perfectly; 
and only he can be called an ekãntik bhakta.  He should be known to 

GADHADÃ II 
- 426 - 
have  qualities  like  that  of  a pati-vratã who  abides  by  the  vow  of 
fidelity, and only he should be known to possess gnãn.  Also, Bhagvãn 
becomes  pleased  upon  him.    Such  a bhakta is  extremely  dear  to 
Bhagvãn; that is why Bhagvãn has said in the Geetã: 
 
priyo hi gnãnino-tyartha-maham sa cha mama priyaha 
I am very dear to a person with gnãn, and he is dear to me. 
 
1.13
 “So, only such bhaktas of Bhagvãn, who  have  qualities  like  that  of  a 
pati-vratã,  are  extremely  dear  to Bhagvãn.    Moreover,  it  is  not  as  if 
such qualities  are  only  acquired  by  a  person  who  is  clever;  it  is 
acquired by all those who have an intense desire for them – just like 
in the world, naïve wives may be faithful, while shrewd wives may be 
unfaithful.  Therefore, it does not matter whether a person is shrewd 
or  naïve;  instead,  it  is  those  who  have  an  intense  desire  for kalyãn 
that keep the qualities of a pati-vratã and offer bhakti to Bhagvãn. 
 
1.14
 “The state in which a person views pleasant and unpleasant vishays 
as equal and becomes free of moh, cannot be attained in just one day.  
Such  an  achievement  cannot  be  accomplished  so  hastily;  only  a 
person  who  attempts  to  do  so  gradually  and  earnestly  accomplishes 
it.    Take  the  example  of  a  stone  placed  on  the  edge  of  a  water-well.  
Due to the constant drawing of water with a rope, after a long period 
of  time  that  rope  causes  a  groove  to form in  the  stone,  despite  the 
rope  being  soft.    Even  if  an  iron  chain  were  to  be  used  to  draw  the 
water,  such  a  groove  would  still  not form immediately.    Therefore, 
those  who  wish  to  strive  for kalyãn should  eradicate  attachment  to 
the vishays,  and  they should  not  become  frustrated  or  upset.   This  is 
also mentioned in the Geetã: 
 
anek-janma-sansiddh-stato yãti parãm gatim 
A yogi who has become siddh after many lives, attains Akshardhãm. 
 
1.15
 “Therefore,  a  person  should  think, ‘I  will  eradicate  as  much 
attachment to the vishays as is possible in this life, and if in the process, 

GADHADÃ II 
- 427 - 
some attachment still remains, then it can be eradicated in a future life.  
Moreover, since I am a bhakta of Bhagvãn, I do not desire to enter the 
cycle of births and deaths’.    In  this  way,  a bhakta should  remain 
courageous and continue to gradually uproot moh. 
 
1.16
 “As long as pleasant and unpleasant vishays do  not  appear  to  be 
equal, a bhakta of Bhagvãn is said to be in sãdhan-dashã.  When they 
do appear to be equal, that bhakta should be known to have attained 
siddh-dashã.  When a person abandons his attachment to vishays and 
attains siddh-dashã,  he  should  be  known  to  have  become  fulfilled.  
This  is  the  very  essence  of  all  the shãstras.    Furthermore,  this  talk 
which I have delivered before you is the fundamental principle of all 
the shãstras.    Therefore,  all bhaktas should  firmly  remember  it  in 
their lives.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 1 || 134 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 2 
Overcoming The Panch-Vishays 
 
2.1
 In the Samvat year 1877, on Shrãvan sud 3 [1
st
 August 1821], Swãmi 
Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a silken, square cushion in 
front of  the mandir of Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s 
darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A 
sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had 
gathered  before  Him.   Some of  the munis were  singing kirtans to  the 
accompaniment of a jhãnjh and mrudang. 
 
2.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Please stop singing as I wish to speak to 
you.”  Shreeji Mahãrãj continued, “A person who wishes to attain 
ultimate kalyãn and  hopes  to  become  a sãdhu like Nãrad and  the 
Sanakãdik, should think, ‘The jeev resides in the body; and the indriyas 
and  antah-karans have attached themselves to that jeev’.    They  have 

GADHADÃ II 
- 428 - 
also  attached  themselves  externally  to  the panch-vishays.    However, 
due  to  ignorance,  the jeev believes  those indriyas,  and  the antah-
karans to  be  its  own  form,  whereas  in  actual  fact,  it  is  distinct  from 
them.    The vishays are  also  distinct  from  the antah-karans,  but 
because  of  constant  association  with  them,  they  appear  to  have 
become one with the antah-karans. 
 
2.3
 “In fact, the desire to indulge in the vishays actually arises because of 
the indriyas,  not  because of  the antah-karans.  For example,  extreme 
heat or cold first comes into contact with the outer indriyas, and then 
enters the body via those indriyas.  In other words, it is not generated 
from  within;  it  is  generated  outside  and  then  enters  within.    In  the 
same way, desires for the panch-vishays are not initially generated in 
the antah-karans; the indriyas first come into contact with the vishays 
externally,  and  then  those vishays enter  the antah-karans.  To  give 
another  example,  when  an  ulcer  develops  externally  on  the  skin,  it 
can be soothed only by applying medication externally, not by merely 
hearing  talks.   Also, hunger  and  thirst  can  only  be relieved  by  eating 
and drinking, but not by merely talking about food and water.  In the 
same   way,   the   disease  (panch-vishays)   can   only   be   cured   when 
medication is applied externally. 
 
2.4
 “The method of applying that medication is as follows:  When a 
person’s skin touches a vishay,  like  women  and  other  objects,  that 
object ‘enters’ the antah-karans via  the  skin.    Then,  via  the antah-
karans, it ‘enters’ the jeev.    The vishay was  not  initially  generated 
from  within  the jeev or  from  the antah-karans.  In  fact,  all vishays 
which  currently  spring  forth  from  the antah-karans have  definitely 
‘entered’  from  outside  through  the indriyas – in  a  previous  life.  
Therefore,  the  medicine  for  eradicating  attachment  to  the vishays is 
as  follows:    A  person  should  refrain  from  touching  objects  like 
women and other tempting objects via the skin; he should not look at 
their  beauty  via  the  eyes,  nor  talk  about  them  using  the  tongue;  he 
should  not  listen  to  them  or  about  them  via  the  ears;  he  should  not 

GADHADÃ II 
- 429 - 
smell their fragrance through the nose.  Through the five indriyas, if a 
person firmly abstains from the vishays in this way, then the ‘flow’ of 
the vishays cannot  enter within  from outside.   For  example,  a  water-
well can only be cleaned when the small streamlets of water that flow 
into  the  well  are clogged from  their  entrance with cloth  rags.    In  the 
same way, by keeping control over the external indriyas, the external 
vishays cannot enter the antah-karans. 
 
2.5
 “A stomach illness can only be cured when medicine enters the 
stomach.  In the same way, the vishays that have already accumulated 
in  the antah-karans by  the  way  of  the indriyas should  be  eradicated 
by  thinking  of  his  own  self  as  the ãtmã.    He  should  think, ‘I am the 
ãtmã.      The   indriyas   and   the   antah-karans   have   absolutely   no 
relationship with me’.    With  such  firm  thinking,  by  seeing Bhagvãn’s 
murti in  that chaitanya (jeev),  and  through  the  bliss  of  the ãtmã,  he 
should  remain  fulfilled.    Take  the  example  of  a  water-well  that  is 
completely full of water.  The water in the well will prevent the flow 
of new water from entering the well.  However, if the well is emptied 
by drawing water from it, then new water from outside will enter it.  
Similarly,  through  the  bliss  of  the ãtmã,  a  person  should  remain 
fulfilled  within.    Externally,  he  should  obstruct  the ‘inflow’ of the 
vishays through  the indriyas.    This  is  the  only  definite  method  for 
overcoming  vicious  natures,  such  as kãm and krodh;  they  cannot  be 
overcome by upvãs alone.  So please remember this thought firmly in 
your lives.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 2 || 135 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 3 
The Rasik Path 
The Knowledge Of The Ãtmã 
 
3.1
 In the Samvat year 1878, on Shrãvan sud 4 [2
nd
 August 1821], Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  square  cushion  in  front 

GADHADÃ II 
- 430 - 
of the mandir of Shree Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of 
paramhans, as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered 
before  Him.    Some  of  the paramhans were  singing kirtans to  the 
accompaniment of a jhãnjh and mrudang. 
 
3.2
 Then,   with   a   gesture   of   His   eyes,   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   silenced   the 
audience and said, “Those of you who are senior paramhans,  please 
come to the front as I wish to speak to you.” 
 
3.3
 So   saying,   Shreeji   Mahãrãj  continued,  “For  those  who  worship 
Bhagvãn,  there  are  two  paths  that  lead  to  greatness,  and  there  are 
also two paths that lead to downfall, all of which I shall now explain.  
One  path  is  to  offer bhakti to Bhagvãn via  the rasik path,  and  the 
other path is knowledge of the ãtmã.  Both can lead to greatness, but 
both can also lead to downfall.  Of these, thousands have fallen from 
the rasik path,  with  only  a  few  attaining Bhagvãn.    Even  the  great 
ãchãryas have  encouraged  the  offering  of bhakti via  the rasik path.  
However,   many   have   been   ruined   by   it,   and   only   a   few   have 
benefited. 
 
3.4
 “The reason for this is that when Bhagvãn is described in a rasik way, 
Rãdhikãji and Lakshmiji,   along   with   their   companions,   are   also 
described   together   with Bhagvãn.      When   women   are   described, 
obviously  their  physical  features  are  also  described.    Then,  how  can 
the  mind  of  the  person  who  is  describing  them  possibly  remain 
undisturbed?  In fact, the nature of the indriyas is such that they only 
develop  affection  for  those vishays that  are  seductive.    No  woman  in 
all the loks possesses beauty that matches the beauty of Rãdhikãji or 
Lakshmiji,  nor is  there anyone  who has  such  a sweet  voice  as  theirs; 
even   the   fragrance   radiating   from   their   bodies   is   unrivalled.  
Therefore,  upon  seeing  or  hearing  about  such  beauty,  how  can  a 
person not become infatuated?  It is inevitable.  Even if a person’s 
mind  is  only  slightly  disturbed,  he  still  falls  from  the  path  of kalyãn.  

GADHADÃ II 
- 431 - 
Therefore,  all  of  this  proves  to  be  a  great  obstacle  for  those  who 
worship Bhagvãn via the rasik path. 
 
3.5
 “Now, brahm-gnãn (knowledge of the ãtmã) can also give rise to the 
following  incorrect  understanding:   brahm itself  assumes  the svarup 
of Prakruti-Purush.    Then,  that brahm itself  assumes  the svarup of 
Brahmã, Vishnu,  and Shiv.    Thereafter, brahm assumes  the sthãvar 
and jangam svarups of  creation.    Subsequently, brahm also  becomes 
the jeevs residing in those sthãvar and jangam svarups of creation.  By 
misunderstanding brahm-gnãn in this way, a person then believes his 
own jeev to be Bhagvãn, which causes him to betray his upãsanã.  As 
a  result,  he  also  falls  from  the  path  of Bhagvãn.    So,  in  the  path  of 
brahm-gnãn, such a betrayal of his upãsanã is a major obstacle.  This 
is  because  the  very Bhagvãn who  is  to  be understood  as  the  cause 
and master of everything has been insulted.  Therefore, a person with 
this understanding should also be known to have fallen from the path 
of kalyãn. 
 
3.6
 “Now, while these two paths do lead to kalyãn,  the  obstacles  along 
the way are also extremely damaging.  So, what should a person who 
desires kalyãn do?  Please answer this question.” 
 
3.7
 All the paramhans then began to think, but no one was able to supply 
a suitable answer. 
 
3.8
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “The answer to the question is as follows:  
A person’s mind does not become infatuated on seeing his own 
mother, sister, or daughter, even if they are very beautiful.  Moreover, 
even though he may talk with them, or even touch them, his mind is 
not  even  slightly  infatuated.    In  the  same  way,  if  a  person  were  to 
consider  all  female bhaktas of Bhagvãn as  his own  mother,  sister,  or 
daughter, then infatuation would not arise in any way at all.  Then, by 
worshipping Bhagvãn via the rasik path, he would attain kalyãn. 
 
3.9
 “However, when a person does not have such understanding, and has 
lustful thoughts on seeing some great female bhaktas of Bhagvãn, his 

GADHADÃ II 
- 432 - 
character  becomes  extremely  flawed.    Furthermore,  the  flaw  arising 
from  lustfully  looking  at  other  women  is  eradicated  by  having  the 
darshan of  a bhakta of Bhagvãn.    However,  the shãstras mention  no 
method  of  eradicating  the  flaw  arising  from  lustfully  looking  at  a 
bhakta of Bhagvãn.  The same applies for a female who look at a male 
bhakta of Bhagvãn and  has  lustful  thoughts;  they  too  can  never  be 
redeemed of that sin.  This is described in the following verse:  
 
anya-kshetre krutam pãpam tirth-kshetre vina-shyati 
tirth-kshetre krutam pãpam vajra-lepo bhavi-shyati 
Sins committed elsewhere are destroyed at a place of pilgrimage, 
but sins committed at a place of pilgrimage are as though etched in iron. 
 
 “The verse means:  ‘Sins committed elsewhere can be removed by 
going  to  Bhagvãn  or  a  bhakta  of  Bhagvãn.    However,  if  a  person 
commits a sin before Bhagvãn or His bhakta, then it is like committing 
a sin at a place of pilgrimage; it becomes irredeemable, as if etched in 
iron’.    Therefore,  a  person  who  wishes  to  worship Bhagvãn via  the 
rasik path, should keep his mind pure, as I have explained. 
 
3.10
 “Now, a person on the path of brahm-gnãn,  should  understand  that 
brahm is  not  subject  to  change  and  is  indivisible.    Therefore,  it  does 
not  undergo  change,  and  it  cannot  be  divided.    When  that brahm is 
equated  with  all svarups,  it  is  because  that brahm is  the  cause  of 
Prakruti-Purush,  and  the  cause of  all.    It  is  their  supporter,  and  it 
pervades all through its antaryãmi powers.  Furthermore, that which 
is  the  cause,  the  supporter,  and  which  pervades  everything,  cannot 
be  distinct  from  its  effect.    It  is  in  reference  to  this  context  that  the 
shãstras equate that brahm with all forms.  However, a person should 
not  believe  that brahm itself  undergoes  change  and  assumes  the 
forms of all sthãvar and jangam beings. 
 
3.11
 “Also, greater than that brahm is Parbrahm  Purushottam  Nãrãyan, 
who  is  distinct  from brahm,  and  is  the  cause,  the  supporter,  and  the 
controller   of brahm.      With   this   understanding,   a   person   should 

GADHADÃ II 
- 433 - 
develop oneness with his jeevãtmã and with that brahm, and worship 
Bhagvãn while  maintaining  a  master-servant  relationship  with  Him.  
With this understanding, brahm-gnãn also becomes an unobstructed 
path to attaining Akshardhãm.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 3 || 136 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 4 
The Loss Of Dharma And Bhakti  
 
4.1
 In  the Samvat year  1878,  on Shrãvan sud 5[3
rd
 August  1821],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  the  veranda  outside  the 
west-facing medi in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was 
dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered  before  Him.    Some  of 
the paramhans were   singing kirtans in   the malãr rãg to   the 
accompaniment of a dukad, sarodã, and satãr. 
 
4.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Please stop the singing, and let us now 
talk about Bhagvãn.” 
 
4.3
 The paramhans responded, “Very well, Mahãrãj.” 
 
4.4
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Suppose a person, who follows dharma 
as  prescribed  in  the shãstras and  also  offers bhakti to Bhagvãn,  is 
faced with such unpleasant circumstances that if he tries to maintain 
bhakti,  he  is  forced  to  lapse  in  his  observance  of dharma,  and  if  he 
tries  to  maintain  his  observance  of dharma,  then  he  is  forced  to 
abandon bhakti.  In such a case, which should he maintain, and which 
should he abandon?” 
 
4.5
 Brahmãnand Swãmi replied, “If Bhagvãn is  pleased  by  upholding 
bhakti,   then bhakti should   be   upheld;   and   if   He   is   pleased   by 
upholding dharma, then dharma should be upheld.” 

GADHADÃ II 
- 434 - 
4.6
 Hearing this, Shreeji Mahãrãj countered, “For those who have found 
pratyaksha Bhagvãn,  it  is  of  course  appropriate  for  them  to  do  only 
that  which  pleases Bhagvãn.    But,  what  should  a  person  do  when 
Bhagvãn is not pratyaksha?” 
 
4.7
 Muktãnand  Swãmi  attempted  to  answer,  but  he  was  unable  to  do so 
satisfactorily. 
 
4.8
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  said,  “If  a  person  faces  unpleasant 
circumstances  when Bhagvãn is  not pratyaksha and  there  is  no  one 
else left to turn to, if he constantly thinks only about Bhagvãn, he will 
not fall from the path of Bhagvãn.” 
 
4.9
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  another  question,  “A  person  who 
thoroughly  understands  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn feels, ‘No matter 
how  many  sins  a  person  may  have  committed,  if  he  merely  utters  the 
name of Bhagvãn even once, all of his sins will be burnt to ashes’.  What 
understanding  should  a  person  with  this  belief  develop,  so  that  he 
never falters from the observance of dharma?” 
 
4.10
 Again, Muktãnand Swãmi attempted to answer, but was unable to do 
so satisfactorily. 
 
4.11
 So, replying to His own question, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “A person who 
thoroughly  realises Bhagvãn’s greatness  can  still  abide  by dharma if 
he develops the following understanding:  ‘I want to constantly think 
about Bhagvãn and become an ekãntik bhakta.  However, if my vrutti is 
drawn towards vicious natures, such as kãm, krodh, and lobh, then that 
will  be  an  obstruction in my thoughts of Bhagvãn’.  Realising  this,  he 
remains  extremely  cautious  of  treading  the  wrong  path.    As  a  result, 
he would never do anything related to adharma.  If a person has this 
understanding,    then    even    though    he    thoroughly    realises    the 
greatness  of Bhagvãn,  he  would  never  falter  in  his  observance  of 
dharma. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 435 - 
4.12
 “Indeed, it is not a small deed  to  be  able  to  think  about Bhagvãn 
constantly;  if  a  person  were  to  leave  his  body  while  thinking  about 
Bhagvãn, he would attain Akshardhãm.” 
 
4.13
 Then, Brahmãnand Swãmi asked, “We do realise this, yet we still 
cannot constantly think about Bhagvãn.  What is the reason for this?” 
 
4.14
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “First of all, to be able to constantly think 
about Bhagvãn,  a  person  needs shraddhã.    If he  does  not  have  such 
shraddhã,  it  implies  that  there  is  a  deficiency  in  realising Bhagvãn’s 
greatness.  When there is this deficiency, it suggests that there is also 
a deficiency in his nishchay in the svarup of Bhagvãn.  So, if a person 
realises the greatness of Bhagvãn and also has shraddhã, then he will 
be able to constantly think about Bhagvãn. 
 
4.15
 “Furthermore, Bhagvãn’s greatness should be understood as follows:  
Bhagvãn, who is greater than Prakruti-Purush, is the very same when 
he  enters  them;  He  still  retains  His divya powers.    Even  after  He 
enters  the  entities  evolved  from Prakruti-Purush,  like  the brahmãnd, 
He  retains  the  very  same  powers;  but,  in  no  way  do  traces  of Mãyã 
affect Bhagvãn’s murti.  For example, consider the difference between 
gold and other metals.  When they are buried together in the ground 
for  a  long  period  of  time,  all  the  metals  other  than  the  gold  will 
decompose  into  the  dirt  surrounding  them.    In  comparison,  the 
longer the gold stays in the ground, the more valuable it becomes, as 
it does not decompose in any way. 
 
4.16
 “Similarly, Bhagvãn, devs such as Brahmã and others, or other munis 
are  not  all  the  same.    This  is  because  when  they  come  into  contact 
with  dirt  (vishays),  then  all  except Bhagvãn become  engrossed  in 
those vishays,  regardless  of  how  great  they  may  be.    Moreover, 
although Bhagvãn seems  to  be  like  a  human,  there  is  no  worldly 
object capable of affecting Him.  Regardless of how attractive a vishay 
may  be,  He  is  never  tempted  by  it.    This  is  the alokik power  of 

GADHADÃ II 
- 436 - 
Bhagvãn.    If  a  person  realises  this  greatness,  he  will  be  able  to 
constantly think about Bhagvãn. 
 
4.17
 “However, as long as a bhakta is  attracted  to vishays,  he  has  not 
realised Bhagvãn’s alokik greatness at all.  For example, Bhagvãn said 
to Uddhavji, ‘O Uddhav!  You are not even slightly lesser than me’.  This 
was  because  Uddhavji  had  realised Bhagvãn’s alokik greatness,  and 
therefore was not attracted by the panch-vishays. 
 
4.18
 “For  a  person  who  realises  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn,  to  rule  a 
kingdom or to have to beg for food, are both equivalent.  He also feels 
the same towards a young girl, a 16-year-old girl, and an 80-year old 
woman.    In  fact,  he  views  all  the  attractive  and  repulsive  objects  in 
this  world  as  being  equal;  he  does  not  get  tempted  by  an attractive 
object  as  a  moth  does  by  a  lamp.    In  fact,  he  is  not  tempted  by  any 
object   except   for Bhagvãn;   he   is  only   attracted   to   the murti of 
Bhagvãn.    A bhakta who  behaves  in  this  way,  never  becomes  bound 
by vishays, regardless of how tempting they may be. 
 
4.19
 “However, if a person has not understood this key principle, then it 
would  be  very  difficult  for  him  to  detach  his  mind  from  even  a  torn 
waistcloth  or  a  water-pot.    Therefore,  without  realising Bhagvãn’s 
greatness  in  this  way,  even  if  a  person  makes  an  effort  in  a  million 
other  ways,  he  will  still  not  be  able  to  constantly  think  about  the 
murti of Bhagvãn.    Only  a  person  who  realises  the  greatness  of 
Bhagvãn is able to constantly think about Him.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 4 || 137 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 5 
Fidelity And Courage 
 
5.1
 In  the Samvat year  1878,  on Shrãvan sud 7[5
th
 August  1821], Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  square  cushion  which 

GADHADÃ II 
- 437 - 
had  been  placed  on  the  platform  in  front  of  the mandir of Shree 
Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was 
dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered  before  Him.    Some  of 
the paramhans were  singing kirtans to  the  accompaniment  of  a 
mrudang. 
 
5.2
 Then, with a gesture of His eyes, Shreeji Mahãrãj stopped the kirtans 
and said, “Everyone please listen, as I wish to speak.  A bhakta of 
Bhagvãn should  firstly  maintain pati vratã,  and  secondly  maintain 
courage.    For  example,  consider  a pati-vratã wife  who  abides  by  the 
vow  of  fidelity.    Even  if  her  husband  is  old,  sick,  poor,  or  ugly,  the 
mind  of  that pati-vratã wife  would  never  sway  upon  seeing  the 
qualities  of  another  man.  Even if a beggar’s wife, who observes this 
vow, were to see a great king, her mind would not waver.  In a similar 
way,  a bhakta of Bhagvãn should  follow  the  vow  of pati vratã with 
Bhagvãn. 
 
5.3
 “Furthermore, if someone were to speak ill of a woman’s husband, 
then she will not remain timid and quiet.  Instead, she will reply very 
courageously.    In  this  way,  a bhakta of Bhagvãn should  not  become 
suppressed by evil people; he should be courageous. 
 
5.4
 “It  is  generally said that a sãdhu should  view  everyone  equally.  
However,  this  is  not  the  principle  of  the shãstras,  as bhaktas like 
Nãrad, the Sanakãdik, Dhruv, and Prahlãd, have taken the side of only 
Bhagvãn and His bhaktas; they have never taken the side of vimukhs.  
A person who does side with a vimukh, will himself definitely become 
a vimukh as well, either in this life or in the next.  Therefore, a bhakta 
of Bhagvãn should   certainly   side   with Bhagvãn’s  bhaktas and 
abandon  the  side  of vimukhs.    Please  firmly  remember  this  talk  of 
mine.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 5 || 138 || 

GADHADÃ II 
- 438 - 
Gadhadã II – 6 
Vidhi And Nishedh 
The Nature Of The Chitt 
 
6.1
 In the Samvat year 1878, on Shrãvan sud 8 [6
th
 August 1821], Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Swãmi  was  sitting  on  a  square  platform  in  front 
of the mandir of Shree Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of 
paramhans, as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered 
before  Him.    Some  of  the paramhans were  singing kirtans to  the 
accompaniment of a mrudang. 
 
6.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Please stop the singing and lets us now 
talk about Bhagvãn.” 
 
6.3
 Then, all the munis sat with their hands folded.  Shreeji Mahãrãj then 
continued, “In this world, there are many people who are like nãstiks.  
They believe, ‘Water from the Gangã and other water seems the same; 
shãligrãms and other stones seem the same; tulsi and other trees seem 
the  same;  a  brãhman  and  a  shudra  seem  equal;  food  which  is  the 
prasãd of Bhagvãn and other food seems the same; to do upvãs on the 
day  of  Ekãdashi  and  to  go  hungry  on  any  other  day  seems  the  same; 
and  a  sãdhu  and  a  non-sãdhu  also  seem  the  same.    Despite  this,  why 
have  those  great  men  made  distinctions  in  the form of  vidhi  and 
nishedh in the shãstras?’  This  is  what  is  said  by  people  with  evil 
minds.  That is why I put this question to all of you sãdhus:  Are those 
distinctions,   in   the form of vidhi and nishedh prescribed  in   the 
shãstras by   great   men,   genuine   or   fictional?      May   the   junior 
paramhans answer this question.” 
 
6.4
 The  junior paramhans replied, “The distinctions in the form of vidhi 
and nishedh are indeed genuine.  If this were not so, how could there 
be  a  distinction  as  to  who  deserves  to  attain  Svarg-Lok  and  who 
deserves to attain Narak?” 

GADHADÃ II 
- 439 - 
6.5
 Hearing this, Shreeji Mahãrãj commented, “They are young, but they 
understand well.”  Shreeji Mahãrãj then elaborated upon the answer 
Himself.  “Whatever the great men of the past have prescribed in the 
shãstras is  genuine.    Take  the  example  of  a  wealthy  businessman.    If 
he  writes  a  cheque  to  pay  some  other  merchant,  then  although  it 
seems  that  the  piece  of  paper  is  not  worth  even  a  single  rupee,  it  is 
indeed  money.    Only  when  the  merchant  cashes  the  cheque  the 
businessman  had  signed,  does  the  merchant  subsequently  receive  a 
large sum of money from that very same cheque.  Similarly, although 
at  the  time  there  may  not  seem  to  be  any  benefit  in  following  the 
vidhi and nishedh, a person who does follow dharma by the ãgnã of a 
great sant,  ultimately  attains kalyãn – just  as  a  person  receives  cash 
from cheques. 
 
6.6
 “Moreover, a person who does not trust a cheque signed by a wealthy 
businessman  should  be  known  to  be  a  fool – because  he  does  not 
realise the wealth of that businessman.  Similarly, a person who does 
not  trust  the  words  of  great bhaktas,  such  as Nãrad,  the Sanakãdik, 
Vyãs, and Vãlmik, should be known as a nãstik and a great sinner. 
 
6.7
 “Furthermore, a person who has such a nãstik attitude  believes, 
‘What is the difference between Bhagvãn’s murti and other stones?  All 
stones are one and the same.  What is the difference between a married 
woman and an unmarried woman?  All women are equal.  What is the 
difference between a person’s wife, mother, or sister?  After all, they all 
look  alike.    In  fact,  even  all  the  avatãrs  of  Bhagvãn,  such  as  Rãm  and 
Krishna, look like humans.  Surely, the concept of them being greater or 
lesser has been created by man’s imagination.  But, what can we do?  
We  have  to  live  with  such  people,  so  we  have  to  agree  with  whatever 
they say.  Nevertheless, the vidhi and nishedh prescribed by the shãstras 
are definitely nonsense’.    This  is  the  understanding  that  sinners  such 
as the nãstiks have in their minds.  If a person hears such words from 
someone, then the listener should be known as a sinner and a nãstik; 
and  realising  him  to  be  an  outcast,  he  should  by  no  means  keep  his 
company.” 

GADHADÃ II 
- 440 - 
6.8
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  began  another  topic.    He  said, “The chitt of  all 
people is like honey, or like water saturated with sugar.  For example, 
if a fly or an ant were to fall into that honey or water saturated with 
sugar, it would become stuck in it.  Even if a person were to touch the 
honey  or  saturated water, it would stick to the person’s finger as 
well.    The  nature  of  the chitt is  similar  to  this;  it  sticks  to  whatever 
object it recalls.  In fact, the chitt even attaches itself to things that are 
utterly  insignificant,  such  as  stones,  or  rubbish,  or  dog  excrement – 
things  in  which  there  is  not  even  the  slightest  pleasure.    If  it  recalls 
such  useless  things,  it  will  then  also  think  about  them.    This  is  its 
sticky nature. 
 
6.9
 “Furthermore, just as the reflection of a great sãdhu will be seen in a 
large, glass  mirror  if  he  stands  before  it,  the  reflection  of  a  dog,  a 
donkey,  or  an  outcaste  will  also  be  seen  if  they  stand  before  it.  
Similarly,  the chitt is  extremely  pure;  it  can  visualise  whichever 
object   it   recalls,   regardless   of   whether   it   is   appealing   or   not.  
Therefore, a mumukshu should not think, ‘As I do not possess vairãgya, 
objects  such  as  women  and  other  attractive  vishays  develop  in  my 
chitt’.    In  actual  fact,  objects  develop  naturally  even  in  the chitt of  a 
person who does possess vairãgya.  Therefore, vairãgya or the lack of 
it is not the reason behind this.  Instead, the nature of the chitt is such 
that  whatever  it  recalls;  whether  it  is  good  or  bad,  the chitt thinks 
about.    When  it  thinks  about  an  object,  it  appears  just  as  it  would 
appear  in mirror.   That is  why  a  person  should  realise, ‘I am distinct 
from the chitt.  I am the ãtmã, the observer of the chitt’.  Realising this, 
he  should  not  become  frustrated  by  the  pure  and  impure  thoughts 
arising  in  the chitt.    Instead,  he  should  realise  himself  to  be  distinct 
from his chitt, engage in the worship of Bhagvãn, and always remain 
joyful.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 6 || 139 || 
 
 

GADHADÃ II 
- 441 - 
Gadhadã II – 7 
Eradicating Svabhãvs 
 
7.1
 In  the Samvat year  1878,  on  the  night  of Shrãvan sud 11  [9
th
 August 
1821],  Swãmi  Shree Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  in  front  of  the 
mandir of Shree   Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in  Dãdã  Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of 
paramhans, as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered 
before Him. 
 
7.2
 Then,  Muktãnand  Swãmi  asked  Shreeji  Mahãrãj,  “A bhakta of 
Bhagvãn decides in his mind, ‘I do not want to retain a single svabhãv 
which  may  obstruct  me  in  worshipping  Bhagvãn’.        However, 
inappropriate svabhãvs still  remain  within  him.    What  is  the  reason 
for this?” 
 
7.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If a person has a deficiency of vairãgya, then 
even if he has the shraddhã to eradicate his svabhãvs, they will not be 
eradicated.    For  example,  a  poor  man  may  wish  for  lots  of  delicious 
food  and  lavish  clothes,  but  how  can  he  acquire  them?    Similarly,  a 
person  who  lacks vairãgya may  wish  in  his  heart  to  acquire  the 
qualities of a sãdhu, but it is very difficult for him to do so.” 
 
7.4
 Muktãnand  Swãmi  then  asked,  “If  a  person  does  not  possess 
vairãgya,  what  method  should  he  adopt  to  eradicate  those  vicious 
natures?” 
 
7.5
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If a person lacks vairãgya,  but  intensely 
serves  a  great sant,  and  obeys  the ãgnã of Bhagvãn,  then Bhagvãn 
will  look  upon  him  with  an  eye  of  compassion,  and  feel, ‘This poor 
man  lacks  vairãgya;  and  the  vicious  natures,  like  kãm  and  krodh,  are 
harassing  him  very  much.    So,  may  all  of  those  vicious  natures  be 
eradicated’.    As  a  result,  they  will  be  eradicated  immediately.    In 
comparison,  if  he  were  to  attempt  other  methods,  those svabhãvs 

GADHADÃ II 
- 442 - 
may  be  eradicated,  but  only  after  a  great  deal  of  time  and  effort – 
either  in  this  life  or  in  later  lives.    If  such  vicious  natures  are 
eradicated  instantly,  then  it  should  be  known  that  they  have  been 
eradicated by the grace of Bhagvãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 7 || 140 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 8 
Ekãdashi 
Gnãn-Yagna 
Antar-Drashti 
 
8.1
 In the Samvat year 1878, in the early morning of Shrãvan sud 12 [10
th
 
August  1821],  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a 
square  cushion  in  front  of  the mandir of Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in 
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was dressed entirely in white 
clothes.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various 
places,  had  gathered  before  Him.    Some  of  the paramhans were 
singing kirtans to the accompaniment of a mrudang. 
 
8.2
 Then,  addressing  the sãdhus, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “A person should 
keep the Ekãdashi vrat because of the following story:  Once, Bhagvãn 
was  sleeping  with  his  ten indriyas and  the  mind  (eleventh indriya) 
drawn  inwards.    At  that  time,  Mur-Dãnav,  the  son  of  Nãdi-Jandh, 
came  to  do  battle  with Bhagvãn.    A  young  woman  was  then  created 
from  the  divine  light  of Bhagvãn’s eleven indriyas.    Seeing  her,  Mur-
Dãnav proposed to her, ‘Please marry me’.  The young woman replied, 
‘I have taken a vow that I will only marry the person who defeats me in 
a battle’.  This resulted in a battle between Mur-Dãnav and the young 
woman, in which the young woman cut off Mur-Dãnav’s head with a 
sword.   Bhagvãn was  pleased  with  her  and  said, ‘Ask for a vardãn’.  
The  young  woman  requested, ‘On my day of vrat, no one should eat 
grains.  Furthermore, as I was born from the divine light of your eleven 
indriyas,  my  name  is  Ekãdashi.    As  I  am  a  tyãgi,  on  my  day  of  vrat,  no 
one should indulge in any of the vishays related to the eleven indriyas, 

GADHADÃ II 
- 443 - 
which includes the mind’.    Hearing Ekãdashi’s wish, Bhagvãn granted 
her that vardãn.  This is the story as it is narrated in the Purãns. 
 
8.3
 “The Dharma-Shãstras  also  state:   ‘The Ekãdashi vrat should be kept.  
On  that  day,  a  person  should  not  allow  impure  thoughts,  such  as  kãm, 
krodh,  and  lobh,  to  arise  in  the  mind;  nor  should  he  physically  engage 
in any immoral activities’.    This  is  what  the shãstras prescribe.    In 
agreement with those shãstras, I also say that on the day of Ekãdashi, 
a person should not merely do upvãs, but he should also abandon the 
‘food’ of the  eleven indriyas.    Only  then  can  the Ekãdashi vrat be 
considered true; without that, it should be known as mere upvãs. 
 
8.4
 “Just as the prãns have  their  diet  (food),  the  ears  have  a  diet  of 
sounds, the eyes have a diet of sights, the tongue has a diet of tastes, 
the nose has a diet of smells, and the mind has a diet of thoughts and 
desires.  In this way, the eleven indriyas have their diets.  To give up 
all  these  is  called Ekãdashi  vrat.    However,  to  allow  the  eleven 
indriyas to  roam  freely  along  the  path  of  immorality  and  indulge  in 
their  ‘foods’  is  not  truly Ekãdashi according   to   the shãstras.  
Therefore, when keeping an Ekãdashi vrat, the eleven indriyas should 
not be allowed their ‘foods’.  As this vrat arrives  once  every  fifteen 
days, a person should definitely make a point of keeping it.  In return, 
Bhagvãn will become pleased.  Without this, merely doing upvãs does 
not please Him. 
 
8.5
 “The residents of Shvet-Dvip,  who  are  called niranna-muktas,  are 
continuously keeping this vrat, and they never allow it to be broken.  
That is precisely why they are called niranna muktas.  We too should 
have such aspirations as, ‘I want to become like those niranna-muktas 
in Shvet-Dvip’.  However, a person should not lose courage.  Only if he 
keeps   courage   and   keeps the Ekãdashi   vrat in   the   way   I   have 
mentioned,  listens  to kathãs and kirtans of Bhagvãn,  and  also  stays 
awake  at  night,  is  the vrat considered  to  have  been  kept  properly.  
This  is  the  very  definition  of  the Ekãdashi vrat as  mentioned  in  the 
shãstras.” 

GADHADÃ II 
- 444 - 
8.6
 Having  said  this,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  became  silent.    The sãdhus then 
began to sing kirtans. 
 
8.7
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj again said, “When Brahmã carried out the very 
first  creation,  he  told  all  the  people, ‘You should all perform yagnas.  
Through  them  you will  attain  all  the  purushãrths,  and  the  process  of 
creation   will   also   flourish.      Therefore,   be   sure   to   perform   these 
sacrifices’.   Brahmã then  demonstrated  the  many  different  types  of 
yagnas, along  with  their  rituals,  as  described  in  the  Veds.    To  those 
who  had  adopted  the  path  of pravrutti, Brahmã demonstrated  the 
rãjasi and tãmasi yagnas.    To  those  who  had  adopted  the  path  of 
nivrutti,  he  demonstrated sãttvik yagnas.  These yagnas have  also 
been  described  by Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn in  the  Bhagvad  Geetã.  
Since we have adopted the path of nivrutti, we should perform sãttvik 
yagnas, not rãjasi or tãmasi yagnas in which animals are slaughtered. 
 
8.8
 “A  person  can  perform  a sãttvik yagna by  withdrawing  the  ten 
indriyas and  the  mind  (the  eleventh indriya)  from whichever vishays 
they  have  become  attached  to,  and  then  offering  them  into brahm-
agni.    This  is  called  a yog-yagna.    By  continuously  making  these 
offerings, Parbrahm Shree Purushottam incarnates  Himself  with  the 
brahm-svarup self  of  the  person  who  performs  a yoga-yagna,  just  as 
Bhagvãn grants darshan to  the  performer  of  a yagna.  In  fact,  this  is 
the reward of the yog-yagna. 
 
8.9
 “Also, when a bhakta of Bhagvãn engages in antar-drashti, it is called 
a gnãn-yagna.    Someone  may ask, ‘What  is  antar-drashti?’  The 
answer is:  To direct a person’s internal or external vrutti towards 
the murti of Bhagvãn is itself antar-drashti.  Without doing this, even 
if a person is sitting and seemingly engaged in antar-drashti, it is still 
bãhya-drashti.  Therefore, physical activities related to Bhagvãn, such 
as having the darshan of Bhagvãn, performing His pujã or engaging in 
kathã and kirtans of Bhagvãn,  are  all  forms  of antar-drashti.    All  of 
these  are  aspects  of  a gnãn-yagna.    In  addition, to  see  that murti of 

GADHADÃ II 
- 445 - 
Bhagvãn within the heart, to perform its pujã, and to bow before it, is 
also antar-drashti, and they are also aspects of a gnãn-yagna.  For this 
reason,   all satsangis are   continuously   performing gnãn-yagna.  
However,  it  is  by  the  wish of Bhagvãn that  some  attain samãdhi and 
others do not.  Sometimes it could also be that the bhakta himself has 
some sort of deficiency. 
 
8.10
 “There are foolish people who say, ‘Do not sing kirtans which describe 
the gopis; sing only nirgun kirtans’.    Those  same  fools  claim  that  a 
person  who  roams  around  naked  is nirgun.    But,  if  a  person  could 
become nirgun by  merely  walking  around  naked,  then  even  dogs, 
donkeys,  and  other  animals  would  be  called nirgun.    This  is  the 
understanding of fools. 
 
8.11
 “In comparison,  a bhakta possessing gnãn understands  that  only  the 
svarup Bhagvãn is nirgun,  and  all  those  who  have  some  relation  to 
Bhagvãn are followers of the nirgun path.  Furthermore, any kathã or 
kirtan associated  with Bhagvãn is  also  considered nirgun.    However, 
kathã or kirtan which are not associated with Bhagvãn possess mãyik 
qualities,  and  should  be  considered  to  be sagun.    So,  if  a  person  has 
not  been  graced  with  the  attainment  of Bhagvãn,  then  even  if  he 
walks  around  naked,  he  cannot  be  called nirgun;  whereas  even  if  a 
grahastha has  been  graced  with  the  attainment  of Bhagvãn,  he  can 
still be called nirgun – as can a tyãgi.’  Therefore, the path to attaining 
Bhagvãn is itself the nirgun path, and all activities related to Bhagvãn 
are therefore also nirgun. 
 
8.12
 “As for a person who has come into contact with Bhagvãn, there is no 
limit to his good fortune.  However, such a relationship with Bhagvãn 
is  not  the  result  of  rewards  from  one  life  alone.    That  is  why Shree 
Krishna Bhagvãn has stated in the Bhagvad Geetã: 
 
anek-janma-sansiddh-stato yãti parãm gatim 
A yogi who has become siddh after many lives, attains Akshardhãm. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 446 - 
 “The meaning of this shlok is:   ‘A person becomes a yogi and attains 
Akshardhãm  after  the  good  deeds  of  many  lives  have accumulated’.  
What  is  this Akshardhãm?    Well,  the  attainment  of  the pratyaksha 
Bhagvãn is itself Akshardhãm. 
 
8.13
 “Shree Krishna Bhagvãn has also said: 
 
mamai-vãnsho jeev-loke jeev-bhootaha sanãtanaha 
manaha-shashthã-neendriyãni prakruti-sthãni karshati 
 
 “This shlok means:   ‘In this world, those jeevs who are bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn  withdraw  their  mind  and  five  gnãn-indriyas  away  from  the 
panch-vishays  and  keep  them  suppressed.    On  the  other  hand,  those 
who  are  not  bhaktas  of  Bhagvãn  are  drawn  by  their  indriyas  and  are 
taken where the indriyas wish to go’.  As we are not led astray by our 
indriyas, we should realise ourselves to be bhaktas of Bhagvãn.  With 
this  understanding,  we  should  remain  joyful,  should  engage  in  the 
worship of Bhagvãn, and should offer all the vruttis of our indriyas to 
Bhagvãn.  We should continuously perform a gnãn-yagna in this way. 
 
8.14
 “Without performing such yagnas,  there  is  no  way  to  attain kalyãn.  
The  four  Veds,  the  Sãnkhya shãstras,  the  Yog shãstras,  the  Dharma-
Shãstras,  the  eighteen  Purãns,  the  Mahãbhãrat,  the  Rãmãyan,  the 
Nãrad  Panch-Rãtra,  and  all  other shãstras,  share  the  principles  that 
kalyãn cannot be attained without performing yagnas. 
 
8.15
 “It  is  also  my ãgnã that  all paramhans and  all satsangis should 
continue  performing  a gnãn-yagna.    While  performing  a gnãn-yagna 
in  this  way,  a  person  ultimately  has  the  divine darshan of Parbrahm 
within his own self, which is brahm.  This is the reward of the gnãn-
yagna.    The  highest  point  of  the gnãn-yagna ritual  is  when  a  person 
becomes like a niranna-mukta of Shvet-Dvip.  As long as a person has 
not  attained  this  state,  he  should  realise  that  the gnãn-yagna is 
incomplete.    In  fact,  he should  have  a  strong  desire  to  become  like  a 
niranna-mukta.    In  the  process,  he  should  not  lose  faith,  and  he 

GADHADÃ II 
- 447 - 
should  not  consider  himself  to  be  unfulfilled.    Since  he  has  been 
graced with the attainment of Bhagvãn, he should consider himself to 
be absolutely fulfilled, and he should attentively continue performing 
the gnãn-yagna.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 8 || 141 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 9 
Never Insult The Svarup Of Bhagvãn 
 
9.1
 In  the Samvat year  1878,  on Shrãvan sud 14  [12
th
 August  1821], 
Swãmi Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a square cushion in 
front  of  the mandir of Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s 
darbãr in Gadhadã.  Ãnandãnand Swãmi had just performed His pujã.  
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  wearing  a  red survãl and dagli made  from 
kinkhãb.  He had tied an orange reto with a golden border around His 
head,  and  had  tied  an  embroidered shelu around  His  waist.    On  His 
shoulder  was  a  sky-blue  coloured reto.    Several rãkhadis were  tied 
around  His  wrist.    A sabhã of munis, as  well  as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
9.2
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi suggested, “Let us sing kirtans.” 
 
9.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Let us talk about Bhagvãn.”  He then continued, 
“The path of gnãn should be understood in a way that does not cause 
a  person  to  criticise  the svarup of Bhagvãn in  any  way.    In  fact,  a 
person  should  not  worry  if  at  some  time  or  other  he  has  disobeyed 
Bhagvãn’s ãgnãs; but he should never criticise the svarup of Bhagvãn.  
If  he  does  disobey Bhagvãn’s ãgnãs,  then  he  can  still  be  freed  from 
that  sin  by  praying  to Bhagvãn.    However,  there  are  no  means  of 
release   for   a   person   who   has   criticised   the svarup of Bhagvãn.  
Therefore, a person who is wise should certainly abide by Bhagvãn’s 
ãgnãs to  the  best  of his  ability.    However,  he  should  also  intensely 
maintain  the  strength  of  belief  in Bhagvãn’s svarup: ‘I have attained 

GADHADÃ II 
- 448 - 
the very svarup of Bhagvãn who reigns supreme, who forever possesses 
a divya svarup, and who is the ‘avatãri’ – the  cause of  all the  avatãrs’.  
If a person realises this, then even if he may have left satsang, his love 
for Bhagvãn’s svarup will not diminish.  In fact, even though he is out 
of satsang at   present,   when   he   leaves   his   body,   he   will   go   to 
Bhagvãn’s Akshardhãm and stay near Bhagvãn. 
 
9.4
 “On the other hand, a person may be in satsang, and he may even be 
abiding by the ãgnãs prescribed in the shãstras.  However, if his belief 
of Bhagvãn is not firm, then when he leaves his body, he will either go 
to the lok of Brahmã or to the lok of some other dev; but he will not go 
to  the dhãm of Purushottam Bhagvãn.    Therefore,  a  person  should 
believe that the pratyaksha Bhagvãn that he has attained possesses a 
divya svarup,  and  is  the ‘avatãri’ – the  cause  of  all  the avatãrs.  
However,  if  a  person  does  not  have  this  belief,  and  instead  believes 
Bhagvãn to be nirãkãr or like the other avatãrs, then that is regarded 
as committing blasphemy against Bhagvãn. 
 
9.5
 “Now, consider the following:  Arjun’s spiritual strength was based 
on  his  belief  of Bhagvãn, whereas Yudhishthir’s source of strength 
was   his   faith   in   the   words   of   the shãstras.      Then,   when   the 
Mahãbhãrat war was fought, Shree Krishna Bhagvãn said to Arjun: 
 
sarva-dharmãn-parityajya mãm-ekam sharanam vraja 
aham tvam sarva-pãpebhyo mokshayi-shyãmi mã shuchaha 
 
 “The meaning of this shlok is, ‘O Arjun!  Abandon all the various types 
of dharma and surrender only to me.  I shall deliver you from all sins, so 
do  not grieve’.    By  keeping  faith  in  these  words,  Arjun  never  became 
disheartened, despite committing countless misdeeds during the war.  
He  maintained  firm  faith  in Bhagvãn.    Conversely,  Yudhishthir  had 
not committed any sins, but because he had faith in the words of the 
shãstras, he felt, ‘I shall never attain kalyãn’.  Even when all the rushis, 
Vyãsji, and even Shree Krishna Bhagvãn Himself attempted to explain 
to him, still he did not abandon his guilt.  Yudhishthir only developed 

GADHADÃ II 
- 449 - 
some  faith  when Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn took  him  to  Bhishma  and 
had him listen to Bhishma’s kathã on the true meaning of the words 
of the shãstras.  However, he did not become totally free of doubt like 
Arjun.  Therefore, a person who is intelligent should maintain intense 
belief of the svarup of Bhagvãn. 
 
9.6
 “Even the slightest strength based on  the  belief  of Bhagvãn,  will 
protect a person from great dangers.  Shree Krishna Bhagvãn has also 
said,  
 
svalpa-mapyasya dharmasya trãyate mahato bhayãt 
  
 “This shlok means, ‘If a person has the slightest strength based on the 
belief  of  Bhagvãn,  it  will protect  him  from  great misfortune.    For 
example, when Arjun fought in the Mahãbhãrat war, he encountered 
many  types  of severe  dangers  in  the form of adharma.    However,  he 
was  spared  from  those  dangers  because  of  his  belief  of Bhagvãn.  
Therefore, only he can be called an ekãntik bhakta whose strength is 
based on the belief of Bhagvãn more than anything else; and only he 
can   be   called   a   perfect satsangi.      The   Shreemad   Bhãgvat   also 
mentions: ‘If a person strays from the dharma stated in the Shrutis and 
Smrutis,  he  should  not  worry.    However,  he  should  never  abandon  the 
refuge of Bhagvãn’. 
 
9.7
 “As a result, some may feel, ‘If we promote such talks, dharma will 
become irrelevant.’  However,  this  principle  is  not  intended  to  make 
dharma irrelevant;  its  purpose  is  as  follows:   Desh, kãl, kriyã, sang, 
mantras, shãstras, updesh, and devs,  can  be  of  two  types – pure  and 
impure.  Of these, if a person were to encounter the impure, and if as 
a result some difficulties were to arise, then if he has the firm belief of 
Bhagvãn, he would never fall from the path of kalyãn.  Conversely, if 
there is a deficiency in his belief of Bhagvãn, then whenever he falters 
from dharma,   he   would   feel, ‘I  am  destined  to  fall  into  Narak’.  
Therefore,  only  a  person  whose  strength  is  based  on  the  belief  of 
Bhagvãn is   a   loyal satsangi.      Without   this,   a   person   is   merely 

GADHADÃ II 
- 450 - 
appreciative of satsang.  Even the shãstras mention that only a person 
who  firmly  maintains  the  belief  of Bhagvãn is  called  an ekãntik 
bhakta.” 
 
9.8
  “Also,  if Nãrad,  the Sanakãdik,  and  the devs,  were  to  hear  the  talks 
being presently delivered in satsang, they would say, ‘We have never 
heard such talks before, and we shall never hear them again’.    These 
talks can be described as: 
 
na bhooto na bhavishyati 
Never before have there been, and never again will there be. 
 
“Although these talks are extremely small, even a person of average 
intelligence   can   understand   them.      It   is   as   if   these   talks   are 
personified.    Therefore,  there  is  no  limit  to  the  rewards  of  a  person 
who, at this present time, has a belief of satsang.  Realising this, those 
who  are satsangis  should  consider  themselves  to  be  totally  fulfilled.  
Moreover, a person who has profound love for Bhagvãn, regardless of 
whether he understands this talk, has nothing left to do.  On the other 
hand, if a person does not have such profound love for Bhagvãn, then 
he  should  definitely  realise  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn.    Therefore,  a 
person  who  is  wise  should  think  about  this  talk,  understand  it,  and 
then  take  extremely  firm  refuge  in Bhagvãn.    This  principle  alone  is 
the very essence of all essences.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 9 || 142 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 10 
Nishchay In Bhagvãn 
 
10.1
 In the Samvat year 1878, on Shrãvan vad 3 [16
th
 August 1821], Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  arrived  at  Lakshmi-Vãdi  on  horseback 
from Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He then sat facing north on 
the  square  platform  under  a  mango  tree  in  the  middle  of  a  field  of 

GADHADÃ II 
- 451 - 
flowers.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of 
paramhans, as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered 
before Him. 
 
10.2
 Then Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “The Shreemad Bhãgvat proclaims that 
Brahm is sãkãr.  However, if those who read it do not have bhakti of 
Bhagvãn,  they  will  understand Bhagvãn to  be nirãkãr,  even  from 
reading the Shreemad Bhãgvat.  Also, from the second skandh, which 
describes the characteristics of the refuge of Bhagvãn, those who are 
lacking  in bhakti will  again  understand Bhagvãn to  be nirãkãr.    In 
reality, Bhagvãn is not nirãkãr.  This is because it is through Bhagvãn 
that everything sthãvar and jangam is created.  Now, if Bhagvãn was 
nirãkãr,  then  how  could  He  create  something  that  is sãkãr?    For 
example,  ãkãsh  is nirãkãr.    Therefore,  trees,  mountains,  and  other 
forms  that  can  be  created  from pruthvi cannot  be  created from  that 
ãkãsh.    In  the  same  way,  since Brahmã and  the  rest  of  creation  is 
sãkãr, Bhagvãn, their creator, is also definitely sãkãr. 
 
10.3
 “Also, the Shreemad Bhãgvat states:  ‘The supporter of adhyãtma, 
adhibhut, and adhidev, is Bhagvãn’.    Now,  I  shall  explain  how,  so 
please  listen  carefully.   Adhyãtma (the indriyas of Virãt), adhibhut 
(the five mahã-bhuts of Virãt), and adhidev (the presiding devs of the 
indriyas of Virãt), all entered Virãt.  Despite this, Virãt was unable to 
awaken.    Then, Vãsudev Bhagvãn assumed  the svarup of Purush and 
entered Virãt,   which   caused Virãt-Purush to   awaken.    Bhagvãn 
therefore   acts   with   oneness   with   the adhyãtma, adhibhut,   and 
adhidev of Virãt-Purush.  However, in reality He is distinct from Virãt, 
and only  this svarup of Bhagvãn is  said  to  be  worthy  of  seeking 
refuge. 
 
10.4
 “For example, fire in the form of  light  is nirãkãr,  while Agni himself 
possesses  a  definite murti.    Moreover,  when Agni suffered  from 
indigestion (unable to digest ghee in the fire), he came to Krishna and 
Arjun  in  his  personified svarup.    Then,  when  he  went  to  burn  the 

GADHADÃ II 
- 452 - 
Khãndav forest of Indra, that same Agni assumed the svarup of flames 
and   spread   throughout   the   whole   forest.      In   the   same   way, 
Purushottam Bhagvãn pervades  all  through His antaryãmi powers, 
which  are brahm-rup.    However,  possessing  a  definite murti,  He  is 
also distinct from all.  Brahm itself is a ray of the light of Purushottam 
Bhagvãn,    while Bhagvãn Himself    always    possesses    a murti.  
Therefore,  a  person  who  aspires  to attain kalyãn should  realise 
Bhagvãn to  possess  a  definite murti and  should  maintain  His  firm 
refuge. 
 
10.5
 “Also, he should speak in such a way that does not break someone’s 
refuge  of Bhagvãn.    For  example,  just  as  a  woman  who  carries  a 
foetus  in  her  womb  attains  a  child,  person  who  carries  a  foetus 
(nishchay)  in Bhagvãn,  attains Bhagvãn’s Akshardhãm.    Therefore,  a 
person  should  practice  methods  that  never  endanger  the  foetus.    He 
should also talk to others in such a way that that foetus (nishchay) in 
Bhagvãn does not miscarry.” 
 
10.6
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  returned  to  Dãdã  Khãchar’s darbãr from 
Lakshmi-Vãdi.    He  sat  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on  the  veranda 
outside  the  east-facing  rooms.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
10.7
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  summoned  the  junior paramhans and  began  a 
discussion   amongst   them.      Achintyãnand   Swãmi   then   asked   a 
question:  “From gnãn, vairãgya, and bhakti, which one plays a more 
significant role in the development of love for Bhagvãn?” 
 
10.8
 No, one was able to answer that question.  So, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “I 
shall    answer    that    question,    and    I    shall    also    describe    the 
characteristics of gnãn, vairãgya, and bhakti. 
 
10.9
 “All people have a tendency  such  that  on  seeing  an  attractive  object, 
their  affection  for  any  object  that  is  not  as  attractive  will  naturally 

GADHADÃ II 
- 453 - 
diminish.  Therefore, before the bliss of Bhagvãn’s Akshardhãm, these 
worldly pleasures seem artificial; permanent bliss can only be found 
in the dhãm of Bhagvãn.  For that reason, if a person realises the bliss 
of Bhagvãn while  listening  to  talks  about Bhagvãn,  then  everything 
that  has  evolved  from Mãyã will  appear  worthless.    For  example,  a 
man  with  a  copper  coin  in  his  hand  will  lose  affection  for  it  when 
someone offers him a gold coin in exchange.  In the same way, when a 
person  realises  the  bliss  related  to Bhagvãn,  he  develops vairãgya 
towards  all  worldly  pleasures,  and  he  develops  love  only  for  the 
murti of Bhagvãn.  That is the characteristic of vairãgya. 
 
10.10
 “Now, I shall describe the characteristics of gnãn.  There are two sets 
of shãstras that  explain gnãn:    One  set  is  the  Sãnkhya shãstras,  and 
the other set is the Yog shãstras. 
 
10.11
 “Of these, the philosophy of the Sãnkhya shãstras is as follows:  Ãkãsh 
pervades pruthvi, jal, tej, and vãyu, and there is not even a tiny speck 
that  is  not  filled  with ãkãsh;  still  the  shortcomings of pruthvi, jal, tej, 
and vãyu,  do  not  effect ãkãsh at  all.    In  the  same  way  as ãkãsh,  no 
mãyik flaw can affect Purushottam Bhagvãn.  This fact is mentioned in 
the Krishnatãpni Upanishad as follows:  When Durvãsã Rushi came to 
Vrundãvan, Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn told  the  gopis, ‘Durvãsã Rushi is 
hungry; so all of you take dishes of food and go to him’. 
 
10.12
 “Then, the gopis replied, ‘But, the Yamunã flows along the way.  How 
shall we be able to cross it?’ 
 
10.13
 “Shree Krishna Bhagvãn replied, ‘Tell Yamunãji that if Shree Krishna is 
forever a brahm-chãri, then please make way for us’. 
 
10.14
 “Laughing, the gopis went to the banks of the Yamunãji and said this.  
Immediately,  Yamunãji  gave  way.    The gopis fed  the rushi,  and  he  in 
turn ate all the food.  Then the gopis asked him, ‘How shall we return 
home, as the Yamunã flows along the way?’ 

GADHADÃ II 
- 454 - 
10.15
 “The rushi then asked them, ‘How did you get here?’ 
 
10.16
 “The gopis then  explained, ‘Shree Krishna had told us that if he has 
been  a  brahm-chãri  since  childhood,  then  ask  Yamunãji  to  give  way.  
Therefore, Yamunãji gave way, and we have come to you’. 
 
10.17
 “Hearing  this,  the rushi said, ‘Tell  Yamunãji  that  if  Durvãsã  is 
continuously fasting, then please give way to us’. 
 
10.18
 “Again, laughing, the gopis said  this.    Immediately,  Yamunãji  gave 
way.      On   seeing   these   two   incidents,   the gopis were   totally 
astonished. 
 
10.19
 “Therefore, the svarup of Bhagvãn is  unaffected  in  the  same  way  as 
ãkãsh.    Despite  being  the  doer  of  all  actions, Bhagvãn still  remains  a 
non-doer;   and   although   He   is   associated   with   all,   He   remains 
absolutely  detached.    In this  way,  the  Sãnkhya shãstras describe 
Bhagvãn as  being  unaffected.    To  understand  this,  is gnãn according 
to the Sãnkhya philosophy. 
 
10.20
 “Now, I shall explain the philosophy of the Yog shãstras,  so  please 
listen.    The  philosophy  of  Yog  is  that  whoever  wishes  to  perform 
dhyãn on Bhagvãn should  first  stabilise  his  vision.    To  stabilise  the 
vision,  it  should  first  be  fixed  upon  the murti of Bhagvãn or  some 
other  object.    Then,  while  staring  at  the  same  object,  the  vision 
becomes  steady;  and  with  it,  the antah-karans also  becomes  steady.  
When  the antah-karans becomes  steady, Bhagvãn’s murti should  be 
visualised  in  the  heart.    This  would  not  be  difficult  for  the yogi who 
attempts   to   visualise   the murti;   he   can   behold   it   quite   easily.  
However,  if  a  person does  not  stabilise  his antah-karans through 
practice   from   the   beginning,   then   when   he   performs dhyãn on 
Bhagvãn, many other types of disturbing thoughts arise and obstruct 
his path. 
 
10.21
 “Therefore, the principle of the Yog shãstras is as follows:  ‘The vrutti 
should  first  be  stabilised  through  practice  before  it  is  attached  to 

GADHADÃ II 
- 455 - 
Bhagvãn’.    Realising  this  is gnãn according  to  the  Yog shãstras.  
Therefore,  to  strengthen  a  person’s  understanding  through  the 
philosophies of these two shãstras, is known as gnãn. 
 
10.22
 “Now, the method of practicing bhakti is as follows:  When the ocean 
was  churned, Lakshmiji emerged  from  the  ocean.    After  taking  a 
marriage garland in her hand, Lakshmiji thought, ‘Who is suitable for 
marriage?    I  shall  marry  him’.    Then,  wherever  she  looked  and 
examined,  whoever  was  handsome  lacked  qualities,  and  whoever 
possessed  qualities  lacked  beauty.    In  this  way,  she  noticed  great 
deficiencies in many.  She also saw deficiencies in all the devs and all 
the  demons.    Finally, seeing  that  it  was  only Bhagvãn who  was 
complete with all qualities, without any faults at all, and the source of 
all  bliss, Lakshmiji developed  profound bhakti towards Bhagvãn.  
With intense love, she placed the marriage garland around Bhagvãn’s 
neck,  and married Bhagvãn.    Therefore,  to  realise  such kalyãn-kãri 
qualities in Bhagvãn and to seek His firm refuge is known as bhakti.” 
 
10.23
 Hearing this, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, I have not yet quite 
understood  which  of  the  three  (gnãn, vairãgya,  or bhakti)  has  the 
greater power in developing love for Bhagvãn.” 
 
10.24
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Bhakti has  a  lot  of  power;  and  while 
gnãn and vairãgya also  have  power,  it  is  not  as  much  as  in bhakti.  
However,  true bhakti is  extremely  rare.    The characteristics  of  those 
who possess bhakti are as follows:  When Bhagvãn assumes a svarup 
like a human and travels on this earth for the sake of the kalyãn of the 
jeevs,  many  of Bhagvãn’s charitras are divya,  and  many  appear  to  be 
mãyik.    When Bhagvãn assumed  the avatãr of Krishna,  He  gave 
darshan to  Devki  and Vasudev  in  a  four-armed svarup;  He  also  lifted 
Mount  Govardhan;  He  cleaned  Yamunã’s  waters  of  poison  by 
removing  Kãliyã-Nãg;  He  suppressed  the  infatuation  of Brahmã;  and 
gave darshan to   Akrur   in   the   waters of   the   Yamunã.      He   also 
dispersed  the  grief  of  all  the  Yãdavs  by  killing  the  wrestlers,  an 

GADHADÃ II 
- 456 - 
elephant, as well as wicked persons like Kans.  Similarly, in the avatãr 
of Rãm, He broke the bow and also dispersed the grief of the devs by 
killing  wicked  persons  such  as  Rãvan.    These  and  other  such leelãs 
are known as the divya charitras of Bhagvãn. 
 
10.25
 “However, when Sitã was  abducted, Rãmchandraji appeared  to  have 
become  insane  due  to  constant  crying.    In  the avatãr of Krishna,  He 
fled  from  Kãlyavan,  was  defeated  by  Jarãsandh,  and  also  had  to 
surrender His kingdom in Mathurã to go and settle on an island in the 
sea.  These and other similar actions of Bhagvãn appear to be human-
like.    Even  a  sinner  would  perceive divya qualities  in  the divya 
charitras of Bhagvãn.    However,  a  true bhakta of Bhagvãn would 
perceive divya qualities  even  when Bhagvãn performs  human-like 
charitra.  In the Geetã, Bhagvãn has said: 
 
janma karma cha me divyam-evam yo vetti tattva-taha 
tyaktvã deham punar-janma naiti mã-meti sorjuna 
 
 “This shlok means:   ‘O Arjun!  My birth and my actions are divya.  
Whoever  realises  them  as  divya  will  not  take  another  birth  when  he 
leaves  his  body;  instead,  he  will attain me’.    So,  whenever Bhagvãn 
performs divya charitras, they appear divya to both a bhakta and to a 
person  who  is  not  a bhakta.    However,  when Bhagvãn performs 
human-like  actions,  a  true bhakta still  perceives divya qualities  in 
them,  but  by  no  means  does  he  perceive avgun in  the  human-like 
charitras of Bhagvãn.  Having this understanding is known as having 
bhakti towards Bhagvãn.  In fact, only such bhaktas earn the rewards 
mentioned in the above shlok. 
 
10.26
 “The gopis were bhaktas of Bhagvãn, and they never perceived avgun 
in Bhagvãn in any way.   On the other hand, King Parikshit perceived 
avgun in Bhagvãn just by listening to the talks about the gopis.  Shukji 
then  explained  those avgun to  be  false  by  illustrating  the  powers  of 
Bhagvãn.  Therefore, it is very rare to have bhakti in which a person 
perceives all the charitras of Bhagvãn as being divya, as the gopis did, 

GADHADÃ II 
- 457 - 
and never perceives avgun by understanding them to be human-like.  
In fact, it is not achieved by merely doing good deeds for one or two 
lives.    Only  when  the  pure sanskãrs of  many  lives  accumulate,  does 
bhakti like  that  of  the gopis develop.    In  fact,  this bhakti is  itself 
Akshardhãm.    It  is  this  type  of bhakti that  is  greater  than gnãn and 
vairãgya.    If  a  person  has  such bhakti in  his  heart,  what  would  be 
lacking in his love for Bhagvãn?  Nothing would be lacking.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 10 || 143 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 11 
All Karmas Becoming A Form Of Bhakti 
 
11.1
 In  the Samvat year  1878,  on Shrãvan vad 5    [18
th
 August  1821], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated 
bedstead    under  the  neem  tree  in  front  of  the mandir of Shree 
Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was 
dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
11.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “After listening to all the shãstras,  some 
people  believe  that  they  only  deal  with dharma, arth,  and kãm.  
Thinking this, they themselves also perform religious karmas, such as 
yagnas and vrats,  only  for  the  attainment  of dharma, arth,  and kãm.  
As  a  result,  they  enjoy  the  rewards  of  these karmas in  Dev-Lok, 
Brahm-Lok,  or  Mrutyu-Lok.    Then,  they  return  to  the  cycle  of  births 
and  deaths.    Therefore,  the  religious karmas that  a  person  performs 
while holding a desire for dharma, arth, and kãm, all become sãttvik, 
rãjasi,  and tãmasi;  and  the  rewards  of  those karmas are  enjoyed 
while  staying  in  the loks of  Svarg,  Mrutyu-Lok,  and  Pãtãl.    However, 
they do not attain the gunãtit dhãm of Bhagvãn.  As long as a person 
does  not  attain kalyãn,  the  miseries  of  births,  deaths,  and Narak do 
not diminish. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 458 - 
11.3
 “So, if a  person  abandons  the  desire  for  the  rewards  related  to 
dharma, arth,  and kãm,  and  if  he  performs  religious karmas only  to 
please Bhagvãn, then those religious karmas become a form of bhakti 
and aid in the attainment of kalyãn.  This is described in the following 
shlok: 
 
ãmayo yena bhootã-nãm jãyate yash-che suvrat 
tad-eva hyãmayam dravyam na punãti chikit-sitam 
evam nrunam kriyã-yogãha sarve sansruti-hetavaha 
ta evãtma-vinãshãya kalpante kalpitãha pare 
O observer of religious vows (Vyãs)!  Does not that same food which causes 
illness in beings – if purified and prescribed by a qualified doctor – cure that 
illness? Similarly, if all of a person’s karmas – which normally cause him to 
pass through births and deaths – are offered to Bhagvãn instead, those same 
karmas are destroyed, and are no longer capable of causing birth and deaths.  
Instead, they lead to his kalyãn. 
 
 “The essence of this shlok is as I have described earlier. 
 
11.4
 “However, this fact is actually very complex, and if it is not fully 
understood,  then  on  seeing  a bhakta of Bhagvãn behaving  in  the 
same  way  as  all  ignorant  people  do,  a  person  would  perceive avgun 
in  him.    As  a  result,  the  person  who  perceives  the avgun would  be 
sent to Narak. 
 
11.5
 “But, there is a vast difference between the actions of a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn and  the  actions  of  a vimukh.    How?    Well,  all  actions  of  a 
vimukh are  for  pampering  his indriyas,  whereas  all  actions  of  a 
bhakta of Bhagvãn are  solely  for  serving Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas.  
As a result, the bhakta’s actions are a form of bhakti. 
 
11.6
 “Moreover, bhakti is  like gnãn in  the  sense  that  both  are  a form of 
non-karma.    Therefore,  all  of  a bhakta’s actions  are  in  a form of 
karmas that do not cause attachment.  This is described in a shlok in 
the Bhagvad Geetã: 
 

GADHADÃ II 
- 459 - 
karmanya-karma yaha pashyed-akarmani cha karma yaha 
sa buddhimãn-manushyeshu sa yuktaha krutsna-karma-krut 
 
 “The meaning of this shlok is as follows:  If a person sees non-karma 
(gnãn)  in  the karmas performed  by  the bhaktas of Bhagvãn for  the 
purpose of pleasing Bhagvãn, and he sees a vimukh who has adopted 
the  path  of nivrutti as  living  by  non-karmas,  then  such a  person  is 
said  to  possess gnãn and  is  the  most  intelligent  amongst  all  people; 
he is a yogi; he is worthy to attain kalyãn, and is krutsna-karma-krut 
(has performed all karmas). 
 
11.7
 “Therefore, if a person perceives avgun in  a bhakta of Bhagvãn who, 
by Bhagvãn’s ãgnã,  performs karmas for  the  purpose  of  pleasing 
Bhagvãn, then adharma and its followers will enter and reside in his 
heart.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 11 || 144 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 12 
The Art Of Ruling 
 
12.1
 In the Samvat year 1878, on Shrãvan vad 6 [19
th
 August 1821], Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  in  front  of  the mandir of 
Shree   Vãsudev-Nãrãyan on   the   veranda   outside   the   west-facing 
rooms  of  Dãdã  Khãchar’s darbãr in   Gadhadã.      He   was   dressed 
entirely   in   white   clothes.      A sabhã of paramhans,   as   well   as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
12.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “I wish to talk to you, so please listen.  In 
the  talk  I  am  about  to  deliver,  I  shall  describe  only  one  spiritual 
activity  for  attaining kalyãn,  but  it  is  so  powerful  that  all  other 
spiritual activities are incorporated within it.  It is as follows: 
 

GADHADÃ II 
- 460 - 
12.3
 “The jeev,  which  resides  in  the  body,  feels, ‘Kãm, krodh, and other 
vicious natures are attached to my jeev’.    In  this  way,  depending  on 
which of  the  vicious  natures is  predominant in  a  person,  he  believes 
his jeev to  be  full  of  that  nature  due  to  his  association  with  it.  
However,  not  a  single  one  of  these  vicious  natures  lies within  the 
jeev; the jeev has merely believed itself to possess them out of its own 
foolishness. 
 
12.4
 “Therefore, a person who wishes to attain Akshardhãm should  make 
an  effort,  but  he  should  not  relax  or  lose  courage.    Also,  he  should 
think, ‘Just as the four  antah-karans,  the  ten  indriyas,  and  the  five 
prãns reside in this body, similarly, I am the jeevãtmã, and I also reside 
in  this  body.    However,  I  am  greater  than  all  of  them,  and  I  am  their 
controller’.    But,  he  should  not  think, ‘I am insignificant, whereas  the 
antah-karans and indriyas are strong’.  For example, if a king were to 
possess  little  or  no  intelligence,  then  even  the  members  of  his  own 
family  would  not  obey  his  orders.    When  the  people  in  the  village 
hear  about  this,  no  one  in  the  village would  obey  his  orders.    Also, 
when  the  people  throughout  the  kingdom  hear  about  this,  no  one  in 
the  kingdom  would  obey  his  orders.    As  a  result,  the  king  would 
become  depressed  and  powerless.    He  would  sit  idly  and  would  not 
attempt to enforce his rule over anyone. 
 
12.5
 “In this analogy, the king symbolises the jeev,  the  members  of  the 
household  symbolise  the antah-karans,  and  the  people  of  the  village 
and   kingdom   symbolise   the indriyas.      So,   if   the jeev becomes 
discouraged  and  relaxes  its  authority,  then when  it  wishes  to  use  its 
power  over  the antah-karans and  adjust  them  towards Bhagvãn,  the 
antah-karans will not follow.  Also, if it wishes to control the indriyas, 
even  the indriyas will  not  comply.    Then,  even  though  the jeev is  the 
king of the kingdom (body), it becomes helpless like a beggar.  When 
a  king  becomes  discouraged,  his  subjects  who  live  in  his  kingdom 
assume  power  and  do  not  allow  him  to  use  his  authority  at  all.  
Likewise, in the kingdom (body) of the jeev, the vicious natures – who 

GADHADÃ II 
- 461 - 
are  not  the  king – take  control.    Then,  they  do  not  allow  the jeev to 
have any power. 
 
12.6
 “Therefore,  a  person  who  aspires  to  attain kalyãn should  never 
become  timid,  and should  employ  whatever  measures are  necessary 
to force the indriyas and antah-karans to accept his authority – like a 
king   who   studies   books   about   the   art   of   ruling   and   then   uses 
authority  over  his  kingdom,  but  is  not  suppressed  by  his  subjects.  
However, if the king did not know the art of ruling, the people would 
not  obey  his  orders.    Instead,  they  would  become  unhappy,  or  he 
himself would behave miserably because no one would obey his rule.  
In  this  way,  not  knowing the  art  of  ruling  results  in  two  unfortunate 
consequences.    Similarly,  if  the jeev were  to  attempt  to  rule  the 
kingdom  (body)  without  understanding  the  art  of  ruling,  then  it 
would never become happy.” 
 
12.7
 Then,  Muktãnand  Swãmi  asked  Shreeji  Mahãrãj,  “How  should  a 
person, who wishes to attain kalyãn, learn the art of ruling?” 
 
12.8
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The art of ruling should be learnt in the 
following  way:    First  of  all,  a  person  should  thoroughly  realise  the 
greatness   of Bhagvãn.      Then,   he   should   conquer   his   mind   by 
performing dhyãn on Bhagvãn’s murti.  He should conquer his ears by 
listening to talks related to Bhagvãn, but he should not allow worldly 
talks  to  be  heard  by  the  ears.    In  the  same  way,  the  skin  should only 
be  allowed  to  touch Bhagvãn and  the bhaktas of Bhagvãn.    The  eyes 
should  only  be  allowed  to  do darshan of Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas.  
The tongue should forever sing the praises of Bhagvãn and taste only 
the prasãd of Bhagvãn.  The nose should only be allowed to smell the 
fragrance  of  flowers  and  other  objects  that  have  been  blessed  by 
Bhagvãn.    None  of  the indriyas should  be  allowed  to  follow  the 
unrighteous  path.    When  a  person  behaves  in  this  way,  no  one  can 
overthrow his authority in the kingdom (body). 
 

GADHADÃ II 
- 462 - 
12.9
 “Only a person who makes an effort in this way and totally discards 
timidity  is  said  to  be  walking  on  the  path  of kalyãn.    This  is  an 
extremely great method for overcoming his svabhãvs.  If this method 
of  personal  effort  is  practiced  vigilantly,  then  all  spiritual  activities 
for   attaining kalyãn are   incorporated   within   the   one   activity.  
Therefore,   personal   effort   itself   is   the   greatest   of   all   spiritual 
activities for attaining kalyãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 12 || 145 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 13 
The Svarup Within The Divine Light 
 
13.1
 In  the Samvat year  1878,  on Shrãvan vad Amãs [27
th
 August  1821], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  square  cushion 
on the veranda outside the mandir of Shree Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was wearing a white khes and had 
covered Himself with a white chãdar.  He had also tied a white pãgh 
around  His  head.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
13.2
 Raising  both  arms  in  the  air,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  signalled  the sabhã to 
settle  down  and  listen.    Turning  to  the sãdhus who  were  humbly 
praying  before  Him  with  folded  hands,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “O 
paramhans!    All  the  senior sãdhus,  along  with  those  who  are  wise, 
please  come  to  the  front.    Please  listen  very  carefully  to  what  I  am 
about  to  say.    What  I  am  about  to  say  to  you,  I  am  not  saying  out  of 
any pretence, or out of any pride, or to spread my own greatness.  To 
be more precise, it is because I feel that amongst all of you sãdhus and 
bhaktas,    if    someone    can    understand    my    message,    it    will 
tremendously   benefit   him;   that   is   my   purpose   in   narrating   it.  
Moreover, this talk is based on what I have seen and realised through 
my own experience.  In fact, it is also in agreement with the shãstras.  

GADHADÃ II 
- 463 - 
Although  I  feel  that  it  is  not  appropriate  to  discuss  this  in  public,  I 
shall tell you nonetheless. 
 
13.3
 “I naturally remain in a state in which even if I wished to engage my 
mind  in  the    most  charming  sounds,  the  most  charming  touch,  the 
most   charming   smells,   the   most   charming   tastes,   and   the   most 
charming  sights  of  this  world,  I  could  not  do  so;  I  remain  absolutely 
unhappy  towards  them.    In  fact,  all  the  attractive vishays and  the 
repulsive vishays are  the  same  to  me.    Also,  a  king  and  a  beggar  are 
the  same  to  me;  and  to  rule  all  the loks and  to  beg  for  food  with  a 
broken begging bowl are the same to me; and sitting with honour on 
an  elephant  and  walking  on  foot  are  the  same  to  me.    Whether 
someone  honours  me  with  sandalwood  paste,  flowers,  fine  clothes, 
and  ornaments,  or  throws  dirt  on  me – all  are  the  same  to  me.  
Whether  someone  praises  me  or  insults  me – both  are  the  same  to 
me.    Gold,  silver,  diamonds,  and  waste  are  all  the  same  to  me.  
Moreover,  I  look  upon  all bhaktas of Bhagvãn as  being  equal – I  do 
not differentiate one bhakta as being superior and another bhakta as 
being inferior. 
 
13.4
 “I have intense vairãgya in  my antah-karans,  yet  I  am  not  burdened 
by  it.    I  do  not  feel  burdened  like  a  person  who carries  a  heavy  rock 
on  his  head  or  ties  a  purse  full  of  money  and  gold  coins  around  his 
waist.    My  strict  observance  of svadharma does  not  burden  me,  nor 
does   the   understanding   that   I   am brahm burden   me.      When   I 
superficially    praise    an    object    or    criticise    another,    I    do    so 
purposefully.  Whenever I forcefully engage the vruttis of my indriyas 
towards objects, they remain there unwillingly; as soon as I relax that 
force, they withdraw immediately.  It is like throwing a stone into the 
air – it goes as high as it can depending on the force of the throw, but 
ultimately it falls back to earth.  Also, consider the example of a weak 
animal.  It can stand only as long as a man forcefully supports it; but 
as  soon  as  he  withdraws  the  support,  the  animal  slumps  onto  the 
ground.  In addition, imagine a very strong man who is able to crack a 

GADHADÃ II 
- 464 - 
betel  nut  between  his  teeth.    However,  after  sucking  ten  or  twenty 
very   sour   lemons,   he   would   have   great   difficulty   chewing   even 
roasted chick-peas.  In this way, it is only when I forcefully engage my 
vruttis in the vishays that they remain engaged in them. 
 
13.5
 “What is the cause of my behaving like this?    Well,  it  is  because  the 
vruttis of my indriyas constantly remain inverted towards my hruday-
ãkãsh.    In  that hruday-ãkãsh,  I  see  extremely  luminous  divine  light.  
Just  as  the  clouds  cover  the  entire  sky  during  the  monsoon  season, 
only that light pervades my heart. 
 
13.6
 “Amidst that  divine  light I  see  the  extremely luminous murti of 
Bhagvãn.    The murti is  dark,  but  due  to  the  intensity  of  the  light,  it 
appears  to  be  fair,  not  dark.    The murti has  two  arms  and  two  legs, 
not  four,  eight  or  a  thousand  arms;  and  its  appearance  is  very 
charming.    The murti is  very  tranquil;  it  has  a  human svarup;  and  it 
appears  young  like  a  teenager.    Sometimes  the murti in  the  divine 
light is seen standing; sometimes sitting; and at other times, it is seen 
walking  around.    It  is  surrounded  by  groups  of muktas on  all  four 
sides, who are seated facing Him, and who are engaged in looking at 
that murti of Bhagvãn with  a  fixed gaze.    I  see  that murti in  its 
pratyaksha svarup before  me  at  this  very  moment.    I  saw  it  before  I 
came  into  this satsang; I could see it when I was in my mother’s 
womb; in fact, I could see it even before I entered my mother’s womb.  
Moreover, I am speaking to you while sitting there (hruday-akãsh).  I 
do  not  see  this  village  of  Gadhadã  or  even  this  veranda.    I  see  all  of 
you sitting there as well. 
 
13.7
 “Whoever  realises  this svarup will  never  be  drawn  towards  the 
pleasures of the vishays.  In fact, you also see this svarup  of Bhagvãn, 
but  you  do  not  fully  understand  it.    However,  when  you  come  to 
understand  this  fact,  you  will  not  come  across  any  difficulty  in 
suppressing  the  desires  of  the panch-vishays and svabhãvs,  such  as 
kãm and krodh; they will be suppressed easily. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 465 - 
13.8
 “That consistent divine light is referred to as the ãtmã, Brahm, or 
Akshardhãm.    The murti of Bhagvãn within  the  light,  is  called  the 
essence  of  the ãtmã, Parbrahm,  or Purushottam.    It  is  that  same 
Bhagvãn who,  for  the kalyãn of  countless jeevs,  incarnates  on  this 
earth  in  different yugs,  in  the avatãrs such  as Rãm and Krishna.    In 
this lok, He appears to be like a human being, but He is not; He is the 
lord of Akshardhãm.  Shree Krishna Bhagvãn has said in the Geetã: 
 
na tad-bhãsyate suryo na shashanko na pãvakaha 
yad-gatva na nivartante tad-dhãma paramam mama 
My supreme dhãm is not illuminated by Surya, or by Chandra, or by Agni. 
Having attained my dhãm, no one returns from it. 
 
 “Therefore, even though Shree Krishna Bhagvãn appeared to be like a 
human, He is still greater than Akshar and is divya. 
 
13.9
 “Whoever performs dhyãn on  the  human murti of Bhagvãn sees  the 
luminous, divya   murti seated   in Akshardhãm.      A   person,   who 
performs dhyãn in   this   way,   passes   through Mãyã and   attains 
Akshardhãm.  So, even though Bhagvãn assumes a human body, He is 
still divya, and the place where He resides is also nirgun.  His clothes, 
jewellery,  vehicles, sevaks,  food,  drinks,  and  any  other  objects  which 
become  associated  with  Him,  are  all nirgun.    A  person,  who  realises 
Bhagvãn’s svarup in  this  way,  does  not  have  any  affection  for  the 
panch-vishays, just like I do not.  He becomes independent. 
 
13.10
 “It is this Purushottam,  who  is  greater  than Akshar,  and  who  is  the 
cause of all avatãrs.  All avatãrs originate from Purushottam, and they 
merge  back  into Purushottam.    When Bhagvãn leaves  this  earth  to 
return  to  His dhãm after  assuming  a  human svarup,  sometimes  His 
physical  body  remains  on  earth  like  a  human  being – like  when 
Rukmani  took Shree  Krishna’s body into her lap and was engulfed 
along with it in the fire.  Similarly, Rushabh-Dev’s body was burnt in a 
raging  forest  fire.    In  other  instances,  His  bones  and  flesh  become 
divya, and   He   returns   to   His dhãm without   leaving   behind   any 

GADHADÃ II 
- 466 - 
remains.    When  He  incarnates,  He  may  sometimes  be  born  of  a 
woman,  or  He  may  sometimes  appear  from  whatever  He  wishes.    In 
this  way, Bhagvãn’s method  of  birth  and  death  are  not  always  in 
accordance  with  the  ways  of  this  world.    When  you  thoroughly 
realise Bhagvãn in this way, you will come across no obstacles on the 
path  of kalyãn.    Without  this  firm  understanding  of  the  nature  of 
Bhagvãn,  a  person  will  never  be  able  to  overcome  his  weakness, 
regardless of the amount of tyãg he maintains or the number of upvãs 
he performs. 
 
13.11
 “Then you may say, ‘We have firm understanding of that Bhagvãn just 
as  you  have  described.    Then,  why  do  our  prãns  and  indriyas  not 
become engaged in Bhagvãn?’  Well, a person should understand that 
as being Bhagvãn’s wish.  In reality, such a person has nothing left to 
accomplish;  he  is  fulfilled  and  has  reached  the  end  of  all  spiritual 
activities.  If a person has a firm belief in Bhagvãn, then even if there 
is  a  slight  flaw  in  remaining nirmãni, nirlobhi, nishkãmi, nisvãdi,  or 
nisnehi,   there   is   still   nothing   to   worry   about.      However,   if   any 
deficiency  remains  in  understanding Bhagvãn,  then  that  flaw  will 
never   be   eradicated.      Therefore,   a   person   should   attempt   to 
understand this principle by any means within this lifetime. 
 
13.12
 “If a person has completely understood the essence of this talk, then 
regardless  of  whether  a  person  is  reborn  in  a  lower  or  higher  life-
form due  to  his prãrabdha karmas,  like  Vrutrãsur,  he  will  not  forget 
this gnãn.  Also, when Bharatji was reborn as a deer, he retained gnãn 
from his previous life.  That is the profound greatness of this gnãn.  In 
fact, it  is  even  narrated continuously in  the sabhãs of sãdhus such  as 
Nãrad, the Sanakãdik, and Brahmã and other devs. 
 
13.13
 “However,  talks  regarding  the  nature    of Bhagvãn cannot    be 
understood by a person on his own; not even from the shãstras.  Even 
though  these  facts  may  be  in  the shãstras,  it  is  only  when  the sat-
purush manifests  on  this  earth,  and  a  person  hears  them  being 

GADHADÃ II 
- 467 - 
narrated to him, that he understands them.  However, they cannot be 
understood by a person’s intellect alone, even from the shãstras. 
 
13.14
 “A person who has completely understood the svarup of Bhagvãn, 
and who is also able to see the past, present, and future, still does not 
have  the  slightest  pride  regarding  this  fact.    He  would  not  grant 
anyone a vardãn, and nor would he curse anyone; but sometimes, he 
may grant a vardãn or give a curse.  At times, he remains fearless, and 
at  other  times,  he  may  even  become  frightened.    Despite  that,  he 
would  never  allow  emotions  such  as  happiness  or  depression  to 
come into his mind.  A person who has such an unflinching refuge of 
Bhagvãn would  never  knowingly  perform  a  bad  deed.    However,  if 
due  to  unpleasant  circumstances  an  improper  deed  is  performed,  a 
person with such a refuge would still not fall from the path of kalyãn.  
Therefore, there is no other obstacle-free path like that of having the 
firm refuge of Bhagvãn. 
   
13.15
 “A person who has understood this fact, has  only  pure  intentions.    I 
have  absolutely  no  selfish  expectations  from  my paramhans and 
satsangis.    The  only  reason  I  may  call  someone,  lecture  someone,  or 
send  someone  away,  is  that  if  by  any  means  a  person  realises  this 
fact;  it  will  be  very  beneficial to  them.    So,  all  of  you  should  firmly 
remember this talk.  
 
13.16
 “Also, you should all understand that the murti amidst  the  divine 
light is this Mahãrãj visible before you.  If you cannot do that, then at 
least  realise, ‘Mahãrãj sees the murti which  is amidst  that  akshar-rup 
light’.    Even  if  you  can  understand  this  much,  you  will  be  able  to 
maintain  love  for  me.    As  a  result,  you  will  attain ãtyantik kalyãn.  
Keep  this  principle  constantly  new  and  fresh  in  your  minds;  never 
forget it out of pride.  Remember it tomorrow just as it is today.  Keep 
it  vivid  in  your  minds  and  remember  it  daily  until  the  end  of  your 
lives.    Whenever  you  talk  about Bhagvãn,  be  sure  to  implant  the 
seeds  of  this  principle.    This  is  my ãgnã.    Moreover,  this  principle  is 
so  vital  that  you  should  remember  it  daily  for  the  rest  of  your  lives.  

GADHADÃ II 
- 468 - 
In  fact,  even  after  you  leave  this  body  and  attain  a divya svarup,  you 
should  recall  it.    This  principle, which  I  have  revealed  before  you,  is 
the very essence of all the shãstras, and it is my own firm experience.  
I have talked to you having seen it with my very own eyes.  In fact, I 
take  oath  on  all  of  you paramhans that  I  have  seen  these  facts  with 
my own eyes.” 
 
13.17
 In  this  way, Shreeji  Mahãrãj  indirectly  described  His  true identity as 
Purushottam.    Upon  hearing  this  revelation,  the sãdhus and bhaktas 
accepted  the  fact  that  the murti described  amidst  the  divine  light  is, 
in fact, Shreeji Mahãrãj Himself. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 13 || 146 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 14 
Nirvikalp Samãdhi 
 
14.1
 In  the Samvat year  1878,  on Bhãdarvã sud 1  [28
th
 August  1821], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  veranda  outside 
the north-facing rooms near the mandir of Shree Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in 
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  wearing  a  white khes, 
and  had  covered  Himself  with  a  white chãdar.    Around  His  head,  He 
had  tied  a  white feto in  which  a chhoglu of  red karnikãr flowers had 
been   inserted.      A   beautiful, kum-kum chãndlo also   adorned   His 
forehead.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various 
places, had gathered before Him. 
 
14.2
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “When a sãdhu attains oneness with 
the svarup of Bhagvãn,  does  he  attain  it  through samãdhi,  or  can  he 
also attain it through some other method?” 
 
14.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Once a person has known that this is a neem 
tree, he never has the doubt in his mind, ‘Is this a neem tree, or not?’  
Similarly, if a person has a total understanding of Bhagvãn’s svarup as 
I  described  yesterday,  if he  no  longer  has  any  doubts  about it, and  if 

GADHADÃ II 
- 469 - 
his mind in no way causes his belief of Bhagvãn to waver regardless 
of  the  type  of  company  he  may  encounter  or  the  type  of shãstras he 
may hear, then such absolute nishchay is what I call oneness. 
 
14.4
 “Such  oneness  is  attained  through  profound  association  with  an 
ekãntik  bhakta of Bhagvãn,  but  not  by samãdhi alone.    In  fact,  such 
oneness  is  itself nirvikalp samãdhi.    Moreover,  the sãdhu who  has 
such nirvikalp samãdhi is  also  called nirgun brahm.    Regardless  of 
whether  he  follows  the  path  of nirvrutti or  the  path  of pravrutti,  the 
sãdhu who  has  such  an  unshakeable nishchay is  still nirgun.    For 
example, Nãrad and  the Sanakãdik all  followed  the  path  of nivrutti, 
whereas  the  Sapta  Rushis,  and  Janak  Rãjã,  all  followed  the  path  of 
pravrutti.  However, due to their nishchay in Bhagvãn, they should all 
be known to be nirgun. 
 
14.5
 “However, those who follow the path of nivrutti,  but  do  not  have 
nishchay in Bhagvãn, should be known to be sagun due to their mãyik 
qualities.  Furthermore, a person should realise, ‘This person appears 
to be a strict tyãgi, but because he does not have the belief of Bhagvãn, 
he is ignorant and will definitely go to Narak’. 
 
14.6
 “On the other hand, a person who has nishchay in Bhagvãn will  not 
attain  an  unpleasant  fate – even  if  some  small  deficiency  remains  in 
him.  In fact, ultimately, he will definitely attain the nirgun state.  But, 
a person without this belief of Bhagvãn – even if he is a sincere tyãgi 
and is vigilantly striving to eradicate kãm, krodh, and lobh, – will not 
be   able   to   eradicate   those   vicious   natures   by   his   efforts   alone.  
Ultimately, he will become evil and go to Narak. 
 
14.7
 “Therefore, whoever has attained such gnãn of Bhagvãn,  even  if  he 
has only a weak intellect, should still be regarded as possessing great 
intellect.    On  the  other  hand,  if  he  has  not  attained  such gnãn of 
Bhagvãn, then even if he has great intellect, he should still be known 
as having no intellect.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 14 || 147 || 

GADHADÃ II 
- 470 - 
Gadhadã II – 15 
Keeping Hatred Towards The Svabhãvs 
 
15.1
 In  the Samvat year  1878,  on Bhãdarvã sud 2  [29
th
 August  1821], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  square  cushion 
which  had  been  placed  on  the  veranda  outside  the mandir of Shree 
Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was 
dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
15.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked all the paramhans a question:  “There is 
a  single  thought  which  can  destroy  any svabhãv,  regardless  of  how 
difficult  it  may  be.    Without  that  thought,  the svabhãv cannot  be 
eradicated even if a person were to apply a thousand other thoughts.  
What    is    that    thought?        Please answer    according    to    your 
understanding.” 
 
15.3
 The paramhans replied  according  to  their  understanding,  but  none 
were able to give a complete explanation. 
 
15.4
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “I shall explain.  If a person’s enemy were 
to  ruin  whatever  work  he is  doing,  or  if  he  were  to  swear  at  his 
mother  or  sister,  then  he  would  have  an  intense  hatred  for  him  and 
would  employ  any  means  whatsoever  to  harm  him.    If  not  that,  he 
would at least be extremely happy if someone else were to harm him.  
In  the  very  same way,  if  the  inner  enemies,  such  as kãm and krodh, 
obstruct a person while he is striving to attain kalyãn, he would hold 
the same sort of hatred towards them as well; and that hatred would 
never  diminish.    Whoever  applies  such  a  thought  can  eradicate  all 
svabhãvs with that thought alone. 
15.5
 “Now, if a sãdhu were to criticise and insult those inner enemies, then 
a  person  who  had  the  previously  mentioned  thought  would  not 
develop  a  hatred  towards  that sãdhu;  he  would  be  grateful  to  the 
sãdhu and  would  feel, ‘This sãdhu is helping me conquer my enemy, 
and  therefore  he  is  an  extremely  great friend’.    A  person  who  has 

GADHADÃ II 
- 471 - 
attained  such  a  thought  can  destroy  all  of  his  inner  enemies.    As  a 
result,   no   vicious svabhãvs will   be   able   to   remain  in   his  heart.  
Without  this  thought,  the  inner  enemies  (svabhãvs)  can  never  be 
overpowered,  regardless  of  whichever  types  of  other  thoughts  may 
be  applied.    Therefore,  keeping  hatred  towards  the svabhãvs is  the 
greatest thought of all.” 
 
15.6
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “By which characteristics can  someone 
recognise a person who would never deflect from the four attributes 
of dharma, vairãgya, gnãn of the ãtmã, and bhakti of Bhagvãn coupled 
with knowledge of His greatness?” 
 
15.7
 All  the sãdhus attempted  to  answer  the  question  according  to  their 
understanding, but no one was able to give a precise answer. 
 
15.8
 So, Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “From childhood, if a person has such 
a nature that he would never be suppressed by anyone’s personality, 
nor  could  anyone  mock  someone  or  joke  in  his  presence,  nor  could 
anyone  make  even  a  mild  sarcastic  comment  at  him,  then  such  a 
person  would  never  deflect  from dharma, vairãgya, gnãn,  and  the 
bhakti of Bhagvãn.    Even  though  his  personality  may  make  him 
appear  arrogant,  because  of  his  enthusiasm  to  attain kalyãn,  he  will 
not leave satsang under any circumstances.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 15 || 148 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 16 
Faith In Bhagvãn And Faith In Dharma 
 
16.1
 In  the Samvat year  1878,  on Bhãdarvã sud 10  [7
th
 September  1821], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  wooden  bench 
near the mandir of Shree Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr 
in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of 

GADHADÃ II 
- 472 - 
munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various places,  had  gathered 
before Him. 
 
16.2
 Then,  Muktãnand  Swãmi  asked,  “Some  may  have nishchay in 
Bhagvãn,  like  Arjun,  and  others  may  have nishchay in dharma,  like 
Yudhishthir.    Of  these  two,  if  a  person  attempts  to  maintain  faith  in 
Bhagvãn,  faith  in dharma may  decline;  and  if  a  person  attempts  to 
maintain  faith  in dharma,  faith  in Bhagvãn may  decline.    So,  what 
method can a person use so that neither of the two declines?” 
 
16.3
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “The  first skandh of   Shreemad   Bhãgvat 
includes  a  discussion  between Pruthvi and Dharma,  which  mentions 
that Bhagvãn possesses  the  thirty-nine kalyãn-kãri characteristics, 
such  as  truthfulness  and  purity.    Therefore,  all  forms  of dharma are 
supported  by  the murti of Bhagvãn.    This  is  why Bhagvãn is  called 
dharma-dhurandhar (the upholder of dharma). 
 
16.4
 “Also, in the first skandh of  the  Shreemad  Bhãgvat,  the Sanakãdik 
rushis ask  Sutpurãni, ‘In whom did dharma seek refuge after Shree 
Krishna  Bhagvãn – who  was  the  shield  for  dharma – reverted  to  His 
dhãm?’  Therefore, dharma takes  refuge  only  in Bhagvãn’s murti.  
That  is  why  when  a  person  keeps  faith  in Bhagvãn’s murti, Bhagvãn 
comes and dwells in that person’s heart.  As a result, dharma also 
dwells in his heart.  Therefore, faith in dharma naturally develops in a 
person   who   possesses   faith   in Bhagvãn.      However,   if   a   person 
maintains faith in dharma alone, then faith in Bhagvãn will decline.  It 
is  for  this  reason  that  a  person  who  is  intelligent  should  certainly 
maintain  firm  faith  in Bhagvãn;  and  as  a  result  faith  in dharma will 
also remain firm.” 
 
16.5
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked another question:  “Can the desires 
for  the panch-vishays be  conquered  by vairãgya,  or  can  they  be 
conquered by other means?” 
 

GADHADÃ II 
- 473 - 
16.6
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “Whether or not a person has vairãgya, if 
he  attentively  follows  the niyams prescribed  by Bhagvãn,  then  the 
desires for the panch-vishays can be conquered. 
 
16.7
 “With vairãgya,  a  great  deal  of  effort  is  required  to  withdraw  a 
person’s vrutti from  sounds;  and  even  then,  the  ears  can  still  hear.  
However, if the ears are simply plugged, then naturally no sound will 
be    heard.        Similarly,    if    a    person    does    not    touch    anything 
inappropriate,  he  automatically  conquers  touch.    In  the  same  way,  if 
he  does  not  look  at  anything  improper,  he  automatically  conquers 
sight.    Also,  when  there  is  delicious  food,  if  he  mixes  it  together  and 
adds water to it, and he controls his diet, then the sense of taste will 
automatically  be  conquered.    If  he  blocks  his  nose  when  there  is  an 
attractive smell, he also automatically conquers the sense of smell.  In 
this  way,  the panch-vishays can  be  conquered  by  following niyams.  
However, if a person does not follow these niyams, then regardless of 
how intense his vairãgya may be, or how much gnãn he may possess, 
he  will  not  remain  stable  in  any  way.    Therefore,  the  only  way  to 
overcome  the  desires  for  the panch-vishays is  to  follow  the niyams 
prescribed  by Bhagvãn.    Furthermore,  for  those  who  have  little 
vairãgya, remaining within niyams is the only way of being saved, just 
as   an   ill   person   can   only   be   cured   if   he   controls   his   diet   and 
completes his course of medication.” 
 
16.8
 Then, Akhandãnand Swãmi asked, “An ill person has a fixed number 
of   days   over   which   he   must   follow   his   course   of medication.  
Similarly,  is  there  a  definite  time  period  for  which  a  person  must 
make an effort to attain kalyãn?” 
 
16.9
 Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “It takes a person who has weak shraddhã 
many  lives  to  reach  the  highest  point  of  his  spiritual  activities.  In 
fact, the Bhagvad Geetã states: 
 
anek-janma-sansiddh-stato yãti parãm gatim 
 

GADHADÃ II 
- 474 - 
 “This shlok explains  that  only  a yogi who  has  become siddh after 
many  lives,  attains Akshardhãm.    This  has  been  said  for  those  who 
have less shraddhã. 
 
16.10
 “In  comparison, a   person   who   has   strong shraddhã becomes 
enlightened  immediately.    This  is  also  mentioned  in  the  Bhagvad 
Geetã: 
  
shraddhãvan-labhate gnãnam tat-paraha sanyatendriyaha 
gnãnam labdhvã parãm shãntima-chirenã-dhigach-chhati 
  
 “The meaning of this shlok is, ‘A person whose indriyas are under 
control and who also possesses shraddhã, attains gnãn.  Upon attaining 
that gnãn, such a person immediately attains Akshardhãm’.  Therefore, 
a  person  who  has  intense shraddhã reaches  the  highest  point  of  his 
spiritual activities sooner, whereas a person who has weak shraddhã 
reaches that state after many lives.  For example, if a man is going to 
Kãshi, but walks only two steps throughout day, it will obviously take 
him  many  days  to  reach  Kãshi.    On  the  other  hand,  if  he  starts 
walking twenty miles a day, it will take him only a few days to reach 
Kãshi.  In the same way, if a person has intense shraddhã, then even if 
he  has  only  recently  become  a satsangi,  he  will  still  become  great.  
Conversely,  a  person  who  has  little shraddhã,  even  though  he  may 
have joined satsang a long time ago, still remains weak.” 
 
16.11
 Then, Shree Gurucharanratãnand Swãmi asked, “If those who have 
less shraddhã attain kalyãn after many lives, where do they stay until 
then?” 
 
16.12
 Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “They go and reside in the beautiful loks of 
the devs.    This  is  because  when  that bhakta performed dhyãn on 
Bhagvãn, he used to look towards Bhagvãn, and Bhagvãn used to look 
towards him as well.  However, Bhagvãn was aware of the vishays the 
bhakta thought  about  and  had  affection  for  while  performing dhyãn 
on Him.  Therefore, when the bhakta leaves his body, Bhagvãn sends 

GADHADÃ II 
- 475 - 
him  to  a lok full  of  the vishays for  which  he  had  a  passion.   Bhagvãn 
also issues the following command to Kãl:  ‘You should not interfere in 
this bhakta’s indulgence in the vishays’.    As  a  result,  that bhakta 
remains  in  the loks of  the devs and  enjoys  those  pleasures.    Then, 
when  he  returns  to  Mrutyu-Lok,  he  eventually  attains kalyãn after 
many lives.” 
 
16.13
 Akhandãnand  Swãmi  then asked another question:  “What are the 
characteristics of a person who possesses intense shraddhã?” 
 
16.14
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Whenever a person with intense shraddhã 
wants to engage in an activity related to Bhagvãn – such as going for 
the darshan of Bhagvãn,  or  listening  to  talks  and kathãs related  to 
Bhagvãn, or performing His mãnsi pujã – then to be able to do so, he 
would become very quick in carrying out his bodily activities, such as 
bathing.    Also,  if  I  were  to  write  a  letter  changing  a  particular 
vartmãn,  he  would  be  eager  to  abide  by  it.    In  addition,  even  if  he 
were  a  senior  person,  he  would  become  as  impatient  as  a  child  to 
have the darshan of Bhagvãn.  A person who has such characteristics 
should be known as a person who possesses intense shraddhã. 
 
16.15
 “A person who has such shraddhã is able to immediately conquer all 
of  his indriyas.    However,  the indriyas of  a  person,  who  has  little 
shraddhã on  the  path  of Bhagvãn,  are  extremely  attached  to  the 
vishays.    Moreover,  no  matter  how  hard he  tries  to  hide  it,  everyone 
still  realises  the  fact  that  this  person’s indriyas are   extremely 
attached towards the vishays.” 
 
16.16
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “The indriyas are  like  the  wind – 
even  though  the  wind  cannot  be  seen,  it  can  be  assumed that  the 
wind  is  blowing  by  the  way  in  which  it  shakes  the  trees.    Similarly, 
the vruttis of  the indriyas cannot  be  seen,  but  everyone  realises  that 
they  flow  towards  the vishays.    If  a  person  deceitfully  attempts  to 
hide  this,  then  realising  him  to  be  deceitful,  others  will  criticise  him 

GADHADÃ II 
- 476 - 
even  more.    Therefore,  in  no  way  can  a  person  conceal  that  intense 
craving of his indriyas to indulge in the vishays.” 
 
16.17
 Muktãnand Swãmi then asked, “How can those intense cravings of 
the indriyas to indulge in the vishays be eradicated?” 
 
16.18
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The only means to eradicate the intensity of 
the indriyas is to force the indriyas to follow the niyams for tyãgis and 
grahasthas as prescribed by Bhagvãn.  As a result, the intensity of the 
indriyas automatically diminishes.  When a person does not allow the 
five indriyas (the ears, the skin, the eyes, the tongue, and the nose) to 
wander, the diet of the indriyas becomes pure, after which the antah-
karans become  pure  as  well.    Therefore,  regardless  of  whether  a 
person possesses intense vairãgya or not, if he conquers his indriyas 
and  keeps  them  within  the niyams prescribed  by Bhagvãn,  he  can 
conquer  the  desires  for  the vishays more  thoroughly  than  a  person 
with intense vairãgya.  Therefore, a person should firmly abide by the 
niyams prescribed by Bhagvãn.” 
 
16.19
 Akhandãnand Swãmi asked again, “If a person has weak shraddhã, 
how can it become stronger?” 
 
16.20
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If a person can realise the greatness of 
Bhagvãn then  even  if  he  has  weak shraddhã,  it  will  grow  stronger.  
For  example,  a  person  would  never  be  attracted  to  clay  utensils  that 
are used for drinking water.  However, if those utensils were made of 
gold,  then  he  would  naturally  be  attracted  to  them.    Similarly,  if  he 
realises  the  greatness  of  the  talks  and kirtans related  to Bhagvãn, 
then  his shraddhã in Bhagvãn and  in  those  activities  will  naturally 
increase.      Therefore,   a   person   should   use   whichever   method   is 
necessary  to  understand  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn.    If  he  does  use 
such a method, then even if he has no shraddhã at all, he will develop 
shraddhã; and if he has weak shraddhã, it will become stronger.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 16 || 149 || 

GADHADÃ II 
- 477 - 
Gadhadã II – 17 
Tattvas In The Svarup Of Bhagvãn 
Sthitapragna 
 
17.1
 In  the Samvat year  1878,  on  the  night  of Ãso vad 11  [21
st
 October 
1821],  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a sinhãsan 
on the veranda outside the rooms near the mandir of Shree Vãsudev-
Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed 
entirely in white clothes.  Two torches were lit in front of Him.  While 
kirtans were being sung, a sabhã of paramhans, as well as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
17.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Please stop the kirtans now, and  let  us 
begin a question-answer discussion.” 
 
17.3
 Then, all the munis replied, “Very well, Mahãrãj.” 
 
17.4
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then raised a question:  “Some bhaktas understand 
the svarup of Bhagvãn as  being  composed  of  the  twenty-four tattvas 
of Mãyã,  while  some  understand  it  as  being  composed  purely  of 
chaitanya and free of mãyik elements.  Of these two types of bhaktas, 
whose   understanding   is   correct,   and   whose   understanding   is 
incorrect?” 
 
17.5
 Muktãnand  Swãmi  replied,  “The understanding of  a  person who 
considers Bhagvãn’s svarup as  being  composed  of  the  twenty-four 
mãyik elements  is  incorrect.    The  understanding  of  a  person  who 
considers Bhagvãn’s svarup as  being  composed  purely  of chaitanya, 
and free of mãyik tattvas, is correct.” 
 
17.6
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Followers of the Sãnkhya philosophy 
claim   that   there   are   twenty-four tattvas.      According   to   that 
philosophy,  there  are  twenty-three tattvas,  and  the  twenty-fourth  is 
kshetragna – in  the form of jeev and ishvar – which  is  composed  of 

GADHADÃ II 
- 478 - 
chaitanya.    The  twenty-four tattva have  been  described  in  this  way.  
This is because kshetra and kshetragna have a mutual dependence on 
each  other.    Without kshetragna, kshetra cannot  be  described,  and 
without kshetra, kshetragna cannot  be  described.  For  this  reason, 
jeev and ishvar have been included with the elements, while Bhagvãn 
has  been  described  as  the  refuge  of  both kshetra and kshetragna.    In 
this  case,  how  can  the mãyik tattvas be  described  as  being  distinct 
from Bhagvãn?    For  example,  four tattvas reside  within ãkãsh,  yet 
ãkãsh is  unaffected  by  any  of  their  flaws.    In  the  same  way,  not  a 
single flaw of the mãyik tattvas influences the svarup of Bhagvãn.  So, 
what   is   the   inconsistency   in   believing   that Bhagvãn’s svarup is 
composed  of  the  twenty-four tattvas?    Does  claiming ‘Bhagvãn’s 
svarup is not composed of the tattvas’ prevent inconsistencies?  This is 
how I understand it.” 
 
17.7
 Then,   Dinã-Nãth  Bhatt  asked,  “Should  a  person  who  wishes  to 
perform dhyãn on Bhagvãn’s svarup understand it as being composed 
of the tattvas or understand it as not being composed of the tattvas?” 
 
17.8
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “A  person  who  understands Bhagvãn’s 
svarup as  being  composed  of  the tattvas,  is  a  sinner;  and  a  person 
who  understands Bhagvãn’s svarup as  not  being  composed  of  the 
tattvas is also a sinner.  Those who are bhaktas of Bhagvãn do not at 
all  like  to  senselessly  quibble  over  whether  or  not Bhagvãn’s svarup 
is  composed  of  the tattvas.    A bhaktas realises, ‘Bhagvãn is Bhagvãn.  
There is no scope for dividing or discarding any part of Him.  That very 
Bhagvãn is the ãtmã of countless brahmãnds’.  A  person  who  has  no 
doubts  at  all  regarding  the  nature  of Bhagvãn should  be  known  to 
have   attained   the nirvikalp state.      A   person   with   such stable 
understanding   should   be   known   as ‘sthitapragna’.      Moreover, 
Bhagvãn redeems  all  the  sins  of  a  person  who  has  such  stable 
understanding regarding Bhagvãn. 
 
17.9
 “In the Bhagvad Geetã, Bhagvãn has said to Arjun, 

GADHADÃ II 
- 479 - 
 
sarva-dharman-parityajya mãme-kam sharanam vraja 
aham tvam sarva-pãpebhyo mokshayi-shyãmi mã shuchaha 
Abandon all other forms of dharma and surrender only unto me. 
I shall deliver you from all sins; so do not grieve. 
 
17.10
 “In fact, it is a usual custom in this world that an intelligent person 
will not notice a fault in someone who serves his major self-interests.  
For  example,  to  serve  her  self-interest,  a  woman  will  not  notice  any 
faults  in  her  husband.    This  also  applies to  other grahasthas who  do 
not  notice  the  faults  in  their  relatives,  if  they  have  intense  self-
interest  in  them.    In  the  same  way, if  a  person  realises  that Bhagvãn 
serves  his  own  self-interest – Bhagvãn relieves  His bhaktas of  their 
sins  and  ignorance  and grants  them kalyãn – then  he  will  never 
perceive avgun in Bhagvãn in any way. 
 
17.11
 “For  example,  when  Shukji  narrated  the rãs-leelã,  Parikshit  Rãjã 
raised  the  following  doubt:   ‘Why did Bhagvãn associate with other 
women?’  However, Shukji did not have the slightest doubt.  Even the 
gopis,  with  whom Bhagvãn engaged  in  romantic  actions,  did  not 
doubt  by  thinking, ‘If He is Bhagvãn, why does He behave like this?’  
They  did  not  have  any  such  doubts.    Moreover,  when Bhagvãn went 
to the home of Kubjã, He took Uddhavji along with Him, yet Uddhavji 
did not have any doubts at all.  Also, when Uddhavji was sent to Vraj, 
he  still  did  not  have  any  doubts  on  hearing  the  words  of  the gopis.  
Instead, he greatly realised the greatness of the gopis. 
 
17.12
 “Therefore, the understanding of a person who has developed an 
unwavering refuge of Bhagvãn will not become distorted, regardless 
of  whether  he  is  very  educated  in  the shãstras,  or  he  is  naïve.    Also, 
the  greatness  of  a  loyal bhakta of Bhagvãn can  only  be  realised  by  a 
person who is a bhakta of Bhagvãn.  Regardless of whether a person 
is  educated  in  the shãstras or  is  naïve,  only  a  person  with  a  firm 
understanding  of Bhagvãn realises  the  greatness  of  a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn,   and   only   he   recognises   a bhakta possessing   a   firm 

GADHADÃ II 
- 480 - 
understanding.    On  the  other  hand, vimukhs in  the  world,  regardless 
of whether they are pandits or fools, are unable to develop such firm 
understanding of Bhagvãn.  Moreover, they do not recognise a bhakta 
possessing   a   firm understanding,   and   nor   do   they   realise   the 
greatness  of  a bhakta of Bhagvãn.    Therefore,  only  a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn can  recognise  another bhakta of Bhagvãn,  and  only  he  can 
realise  his  greatness.    For  example,  Uddhavji  realised  the  profound 
greatness  of  the gopis.    Likewise,  the gopis realised  the  greatness  of 
Uddhavji. 
 
17.13
 “Although Purushottam Bhagvãn is the kshetragna of all kshetragnas, 
He  is  still  not  subject  to  change.    Moreover,  the  disturbances  of 
objects  that  cause  disturbances – such  as Mãyã – do not  influence 
Purushottam Bhagvãn.    In  fact,  if  the  disturbances  of sthul, sukshma, 
and kãran do not influence a person who has realised the ãtmã, what 
can   be   said   about   them   not   influencing Purushottam Bhagvãn?  
Therefore, Bhagvãn is   certainly   not   subject   to   change;   He   is 
absolutely unaffected. 
 
17.14
 “A bhakta of Bhagvãn who understands Bhagvãn’s svarup in this way 
should  be  known  to  be ‘sthitapragna’.    Just  as  a  person  who  has 
realised  his ãtmã is  called ‘sthitapragna’,  a bhakta of Bhagvãn who 
has no doubts at all regarding the svarup of Bhagvãn, and glorifies His 
strengths,   is   also   called ‘sthitapragna’.      He   also   glorifies   those 
charitras of Bhagvãn that  appear  to  be  inappropriate,  in  exactly  the 
same  way  that  he  glorifies charitras that  are  appropriate – without 
having any doubts about the appropriateness or inappropriateness of 
those charitras.      Such   a bhakta should   be   known   as   being 
‘sthitapragna’ with  regards  to  the  nature  of Purushottam.    A  person 
who  has  developed  such  a  firm  belief  of  the  nature  of Purushottam 
has nothing more left to understand.” 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 17 || 150 || 
 
 

GADHADÃ II 
- 481 - 
Gadhadã II – 18 
Nãstik And Shushka-Vedãnti 
 
18.1
 In  the Samvat year  1878,  on Mãgshar vad 6  [7
th
 December  1821], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress  with  a 
large, cylindrical pillow that had been placed in His residence in Dãdã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was wearing a white khes, and had 
covered  Himself  with  a  white chãdar,  over  which He  had  wrapped  a 
richly  embroidered rajãi.    He  had  also  tied  a  white feto around  His 
head.  At that time, Prãgji Davé was reading a shãstra before Him, and 
a sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places, 
had gathered before Him. 
 
18.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Having thought over it from all aspects, I 
have come to the following conclusion: Of all the kusang in the world, 
the kusang which is worse than all others is that of those who do not 
have bhakti towards Bhagvãn.    Also,  they  do  not  have  the  faith  in 
their hearts that Bhagvãn loves His bhaktas, is the lord of all, is patit-
pãvan, and is also adham-udhãran.  In this world, two thoughts share 
these  beliefs:    One  is  that  of  the nãstiks,  and  the  other  is  that  of  the 
shushka-vedãntis.  Both are extreme forms of kusang.  Now, even if a 
person has committed the five great sins, but he has faith in Bhagvãn, 
then  at some  time  or  another  he  will  be  redeemed.    In  fact,  even if  a 
person has committed the great sins of killing a child, slaughtering a 
cow, or killing a woman, then he too can be redeemed at some point 
in  time.    However,  a  person  who  has  come  to  accept  either  of  these 
two  sets  of  beliefs  will  never  be  redeemed.    This  is  because  such  a 
person’s  understanding  is  contrary to  that  of  the  Veds,  the  six-
shãstras, and the Purãns. 
 
18.3
 “Of the two, the nãstiks believe that Rãmchandraji and Shree Krishna 
Bhagvãn were  actually  only  kings;  and  because Shree  Krishna killed 
demons and committed adultery, he has been sent to the third Narak.  
Therefore, in no way do they consider Shree Krishna Bhagvãn, who is 

GADHADÃ II 
- 482 - 
patit-pãvan and adham-udhãran,  as  being Bhagvãn.    Instead,  they 
believe  their kalyãn to  be  through karmas.    They  believe  that  while 
performing karmas, they attain keval-gnãn, and become Bhagvãn.  In 
this   way,   they   believe   that   there   are countless Bhagvãns.      So, 
according to the belief of the nãstiks, there is no one, eternal Bhagvãn, 
by  whose  worship  a jeev is  released  from  the  bondage  of  births  and 
deaths.  Therefore, that belief is not in accordance with the Veds. 
 
18.4
 “The shushka-vedãntis believe  that brahm itself  has  assumed  the 
svarup of  the jeevs – just  as  in  the  relationship  between  the  sun  and 
its reflection.  Therefore, when a person realises ‘I am brahm’, he has 
no further  spiritual  activities  left  to  perform.    Then,  when  he  has 
become Bhagvãn, he does not need to worship anyone.  Thinking this, 
they no longer have fear in committing sins.  Moreover, they believe, 
‘We have attained the nirgun path, so we will not have  to  take  birth 
again’.    However,  the shushka-vedãntis do  not  examine  their  own 
understanding  which  implies  that nirgun brahm,  which  is  beyond 
Mãyã,  will  also  have  to  pass  through  births  and  deaths.    This  is 
because  they  claim  that brahm itself  has  assumed  the svarup of  all 
sthãvar and jangam objects.    This  means  that  just  as  a jeev has  to 
undergo  births  and  deaths, brahm also  has  to  undergo  births  and 
deaths.    Also,  while  they  think, ‘We will be released from births and 
deaths’,  they  do  not  realise, ‘According  to  our  own  beliefs,  births  and 
deaths  have  become  a  reality  for  brahm  itself.    Therefore,  if  we  do 
develop  deep  understanding,  at  most  we  shall  realise  ourselves  to  be 
brahm-svarup.    But  even  then,  the  cycle  of  births  and  deaths  will  still 
not  be  dispelled’.    As  a  result,  by  their  own  beliefs, moksh is  proven 
false.    Nevertheless,  no  one  examines  this.    Instead,  they  boast, ‘We 
are brahm-svarup, so who do we need to worship?  Who do we bow to?’  
Thinking  this,  they  become  extremely  arrogant.    Even  though  they 
have  not  truly  understood  anything,  they  still  have  pride  of  their 
gnãn.    However,  they  do  not  realise  that  their  own moksh is  proven 
false  by  their  own  beliefs.    Moreover,  they  convert  those  who  keep 
their company into fools as well. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 483 - 
18.5
 “However, bhaktas possessing   true gnãn,   such   as Nãrad,   the 
Sanakãdik,   and   Shukji,  constantly   perform dhyãn upon Bhagvãn, 
chant  His  holy  name,  and  sing kirtans.    Even  the niranna-muktas in 
Shvet-Dvip,   who   are brahm-svarup and   who   can   control Kãl, 
continuously perform dhyãn upon Bhagvãn, chant His holy name, and 
sing kirtans about  Him.    They  also  offer pujã,  smear  sandalwood 
paste on Him, and perform dandvats.  Despite being akshar-rup, they 
behave  as  the dãs of Purushottam Bhagvãn.    Also,  the  residents  of 
Badrikãshram,  including  Uddhav,  Tanu  Rushi,  and  the  other munis, 
perform tap and continuously offer bhakti to Bhagvãn.  On the other 
hand,  the shushka-vedãntis are  completely  oriented  around  their 
bodies.   Also,  they  do  not  perform dhyãn upon Bhagvãn, nor do they 
chant  the  name  of Bhagvãn,  and  nor  do  they  bow  before Bhagvãn.  
Compared  to  the  power  and gnãn of Nãrad,  the Sanakãdik,  and 
Shukji;  and  compared  to  the  power  and gnãn of  the niranna-muktas 
who  reside  in  Shvet-Dvip;  and  compared  to  the  power  and gnãn of 
the rushis who reside in Badrikãshram, these shushka-vedãntis do not 
possess  even  a  millionth  of  a  fraction  of  such  power  and gnãn.  
Nevertheless, they equate themselves with Bhagvãn.  Therefore, they 
are  absolutely  ignorant.    In  fact,  they are  the  most  ignorant  of  all 
ignorant  people.    Even  after  spending  countless  millions  of  years  in 
the pits of Narak suffering the torments of Yam, they will still not be 
released. 
 
18.6
 “Therefore, to associate with such people is the very definition of 
kusang.  Just as there is no deed greater than keeping the company of 
the sat-purush,  conversely,  there  is  no  sin  worse  than  keeping  the 
company of ignorant people such as the shushka-vedãntis.  Therefore, 
a person who desires moksh should in no way keep the company of a 
nãstik or a shushka-vedãnti.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 18 || 151 || 
 
 

GADHADÃ II 
- 484 - 
Gadhadã II – 19 
Distress After Hearing Shushka-Vedãnti Shãstras 
Letter To The Haribhaktas 
 
19.1
 In  the Samvat year  1878,  at  daybreak  on Mãgshar vad 14  [23
rd
 
December  1821],  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  arrived  at  the 
residential   hall   of   the paramhans in  Dãdã  Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Gadhadã.    In  an  unhappy  mood,  He  sat  down  on  a  mattress  with  a 
large, cylindrical pillow.  He refused to talk to anyone, or even look at 
anyone.    The  white feto tied  around  His  head  had  loosened  and 
become  undone,  yet  He  paid  no  attention  to  it.    In  this  way,  He  sat 
extremely  unhappy  for  a  while.    Tears  then  begun  to  flow  from  His 
eyes. 
 
19.2
 Then,  addressing  the paramhans,  Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “To learn 
about the beliefs of those possessing shushka-gnãn, I listened to their 
shãstras.  However, simply hearing them has caused much grief in my 
heart.    This  is  because  by  listening  to  the shushka-vedãnti shãstras, 
the upãsanã of Bhagvãn is  dispelled  from  the  mind,  and  a  sense  of 
equality arises in a person’s heart, and he begins to worship devs.  By 
listening  to  the  words  of  those shushka-vedãntis, a person’s mind 
becomes   extremely   corrupted.      Even   though   I   listened   to   the 
principles  of shushka-vedãnti with  a  specific  purpose,  doing  so  has 
brought me much grief.” 
 
19.3
 Having  said  this,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  became  very  unhappy,  and  sat  in 
silence    with    His    heart    filled    with    sorrow.        After    remaining 
disheartened  for  a  long  time,  He  wiped  the  tears  from  His  eyes  with 
His hands and said, “I went to sleep last night after listening to 
Rãmãnuj’s commentary on the Bhagvad Geetã.  I had a dream in 
which  I  went  to Golok,  where  I  saw  countless pãrshads of Bhagvãn.  
Of  these,  some  serve Bhagvãn,  and  they appear  to  be  very  still.  
Others   sing kirtans of Bhagvãn,   including kirtans composed   by 
Muktãnand   Swãmi   and   Brahmãnand   Swãmi.      In   the   process   of 
singing kirtans, they sway in the same way as a person who sings and 

GADHADÃ II 
- 485 - 
sways in euphoria due to intoxication.  Then, I also joined those who 
were  singing  and  began  to  sing kirtans.   While  singing,  the  following 
thought arose:  ‘A person who shuns such loving bhakti and upãsanã of 
Bhagvãn,  and  claims  to  possess  gnãn,  and  believes,  ‘I  myself  am 
Bhagvãn’, is extremely wicked’.” 
 
19.4
 Having said this, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Let us write a letter to send to 
the satsangis in  various  places  so  that  they  never  lapse  in  observing 
dharma and  in  offering bhakti to Bhagvãn in  any  way,  and  so  that 
their  mind  is  never  dislodged  from  this ishta-dev, Shree  Krishna-
Nãrãyan. 
 
19.5
 “‘Written  by  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj.    All  paramhans  and 
all  satsangis – male  and  female – please accept sincerest ‘Nãrãyan’ 
from  me.    I  am  issuing  the  following  as  my  ãgnã:   The  avatãr  of  Shree 
Krishna-Nãrãyan – Purushottam Bhagvãn – incarnates among humans 
and  devs,  for  the  purpose of  establishing  dharma,  uprooting  adharma, 
and giving darshan to and protecting His ekãntik bhaktas who possess 
the  four  qualities  (dharma  in  the form of  brahm-chãrya  and ahinsã, 
ãtmã-nisthã,   vairãgya,   and   bhakti   coupled   with  the  knowledge   of 
Bhagvãn’s greatness).  Therefore, a person should have a singular 
belief  of  that  avatãr – just  as  Sitãji  was  convinced  that  Rãmchandraji 
was  flawless.    A  person  should  also  lovingly  perform  the  mãnsi  pujã  of 
that  Bhagvãn  and  physically  offer  to  Him  the  nine  types  of  bhakti.    If 
that avatãr of Shree Krishna-Nãrãyan is not present on this earth, then 
he  should  perform  pujã  of  His murti mentally  and  also  physically  by 
offering sandalwood paste, tulsi, flowers, and other similar offerings. 
 
19.6
 “Moreover,  he  should  offer  upãsanã  only  to  Bhagvãn  and  not  to  any 
dev; if he does, it is a great sin.  In this way, his vow of fidelity is lost and 
his bhakti becomes like that of a prostitute.  Therefore, a person should 
offer  bhakti  to  Bhagvãn  in  the  way  of  Sitã  and  Rukmani.    He  should 
perform  dhyãn  only  on  that  Bhagvãn  and  not  on  any  dev,  and  nor 
should  he  perform  dhyãn  on  a  sãdhu,  even  if  he  has  attained  an 
elevated state and mastered samãdhi. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 486 - 
19.7
 “Furthermore,  all  should  strictly  abide  by  the  dharma  of  their  varna 
and  ãshram.    All  men  who  firmly  abide  by  this  ãgnã  of  mine  will 
develop firm bhakti towards Shree Krishna Nãrãyan like that of Nãrad.  
All  women  who  accept this  injunction  of  mine will develop  firm  bhakti 
towards  Shree  Krishna-Nãrãyan,  like  that  of  Lakshmiji  and  the  gopis, 
such  as  Rãdhikãji.    Conversely,  the  bhakti  of  those  who  do  not  accept 
these words of mine will become like that of a prostitute. 
 
19.8
 “Written on Mãgshar vad 14, Samvat 1878’.” 
 
19.9
 After  writing  this  letter,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  had  it  sent  to  all satsangis 
residing in various places. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 19 || 152 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 20 
The Sense Of Knowing And The Strength Of the Indriyas 
 
20.1
 In the Samvat year 1878, on Posh vad 14 [22
nd
 January 1822], Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  in  front  of  the mandir of 
Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He 
was  wearing  a  white khes and  had  covered  Himself  with  a  white 
chofãl, above which He Had wrapped a rajãi made of chhint.  He had 
also tied a white pãgh around His head.  A sabhã of munis, as well as 
haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered  before  Him.    Some  of 
the paramhans were  singing kirtans to  the  accompaniment  of a 
mrudang.   
 
20.2
 Then,   addressing   the paramhans,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “At  my 
residence  today,  I  asked  a  question  to  Somlã  Khãchar  and  the  other 
bhaktas who  stay  with  me.    I  would  like  all  the paramhans to  get 
together and answer that question.” 
 
20.3
 The paramhans requested,  “Mahãrãj,  may  we  please  hear  that 
question.” 

GADHADÃ II 
- 487 - 
20.4
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “A person who masters samãdhi attains a 
spiritual  state  that  is  beyond mãyã.    He  also  has  firm  bond  with  the 
svarup of Bhagvãn.  Therefore, the person’s mental ability, as well as 
the  strength  of  his  body  and indriyas,  should  increase.    This  is 
because  the  twenty-four tattvas,  which  have  been  produced  from 
Mãyã, have a form that is both jad and chaitanya; they cannot be said 
to  be  only jad,  nor  can  they  be  said  to  be  only chaitanya.    Also,  the 
strength in each of the elements cannot be said to be equal.  There is 
a greater degree of awareness in the antah-karans than there is in the 
indriyas.  Likewise, there is a greater degree of awareness in the jeev 
– the drashtã of  the indriyas and antah-karans – than  there  is  in  the 
antah-karans. 
 
20.5
 “When the jeev experiences samãdhi,  it  abandons  its  role  as  the 
drashtã of  the indriyas and antah-karans; and  like Brahm,  that jeev 
becomes chaitanya,  and  its  bond  with  the svarup of Bhagvãn is 
maintained.    Now,  regarding  those  who  have  mastered samãdhi, 
some  people  think, ‘Whoever  experiences  samãdhi,  loses  even  the 
knowledge he had previously’.    So,  do  the  mental  ability  and  the 
strength  of  the  body  and indriyas of  a  person  who  has  mastered 
samãdhi increase or not?  That is the question.” 
 
20.6
 The paramhans then  answered  according  to  their  intellect,  but  no 
one  was  able  to  give  an  adequate  answer  to  Shreeji  Mahãrãj’s 
question. 
 
20.7
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “I  will  answer.    The  answer  to  the 
question  is  that Brahm,  who  is  the  witness,  enters  the brahmãnd – 
which   is   composed   of   the   twenty-four tattvas,   and   which   was 
produced  from Mãyã – and  makes  it chaitanya.    This  gives  it  the 
power to perform all activities.  The nature of that Brahm is such that 
when  it  enters  an  object  that  is  as jad as  wood  or  stone,  that  object 
becomes  an  object  that  can  move.    When  the jeev becomes  one  with 
that Brahm through samãdhi,  then  that jeev can  also be  said  to  be 
brahm-rup.  As a result, its gnãn also increases. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 488 - 
20.8
 “With regards to the strength of the indriyas, a person who practices 
yog,  coupled  with tap, nivrutti dharma,  and vairãgya,  attains siddh-
dashã like  that  of  Shukji.    On  the  other  hand,  there  may  be  a  person 
whose tap,  observance  of nivrutti dharma, and vairãgya are  at  an 
ordinary  level,  and  who  follows  the  path  of pravrutti in  the form of 
dharma, arth,  and kãm.    In  his  case,  although  he  may  experience 
samãdhi,  only  his gnãn will  increase, but  the  strength  of  his indriyas 
does  not  increase  and  he  does  not  attain siddh-dashã.    In  fact,  even 
though a person may possess gnãn like Janak Rãjã, those who follow 
the   path   of pravrutti do   not   attain siddh-dashã like Nãrad,   the 
Sanakãdik, and Shukji.  On the other hand, a person who has attained 
siddh-dashã can travel to all places in this lok and beyond.  However, 
for those who follow the path of pravrutti, like Janak Rãjã, only their 
gnãn increases; but it does not decrease. 
 
20.9
 “In fact,  what  happens  is  described  by Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn in  the 
Geetã in the shlok: 
 
yã nishã sarva-bhootãnãm tasyãm jãgarti sayyamee 
yasyãm jãgrati bhootãni sã nishã pashyato munehe 
 
 “The meaning of this shlok is:   ‘A self-controlled  person  is  awake  to 
that  which  all  other  beings  are  asleep;  and  that  to  which  all  other 
beings  are  awake,  a  self-controlled person is asleep’.  Specifically,  a 
person  whose  vision  is  facing  inwards  towards  the ãtmã has  no 
regard to his body, indriyas, or antah-karans.  On seeing this, a person 
who   is   ignorant   thinks, ‘The  gnãn  of  a  person  who  experiences 
samãdhi decreases’.    As  a  result,  if  a  person  under  the  influence  of 
rajo-gun, tamo-gun,  or  impure sattva-gun attempts  to  answer  this 
question, then he would certainly think that the gnãn of a person who 
experiences samãdhi does decrease.  However, he does not realise, ‘I 
constantly  believe  myself  to  be  the  body  and  am  speaking  out  of 
foolishness’. 
 
20.10
 “Therefore,  the gnãn of  a  person  who  experiences samãdhi still 
increases  even  though he  behaves  distinctly  from  the  body, indriyas, 

GADHADÃ II 
- 489 - 
and antah-karans.  Even  after  he  returns  to  the indriyas and antah-
karans,  the gnãn obtained  during samãdhi is  still  not  destroyed.    As 
for  a  person  who  takes  up tap, nivrutti dharma, and vairãgya – after 
abandoning the path of pravrutti – just as his gnãn has increased, the 
strength of his indriyas and antah-karans will increase as well.  Also, 
he will attain siddh-dashã like Nãrad, the Sanakãdik, and Shukji.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 20 || 153 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 21 
Bhagvãn Is The Cause Of All 
 
21.1
 In  the Samvat year  1878,  on Fãgan sud Punam [7
th
 March  1822], 
Swãmi Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in front of the mandir 
of Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He 
was  wearing  a  white khes and  had  covered  Himself  with  a  white 
chãdar.  He had also tied a white pãgh around His head.  Premãnand 
Swãmi and other paramhans were singing vishnupad before Him. 
 
21.2
 Then, Shreeji  Mahãrãj said, “Please stop the kirtans.    I  wish  to speak 
to all of you, so please listen attentively.”  He then said, “I have 
listened to all the shãstras written by Vyãsji regarding the attainment 
of kalyãn.  The main principle prevalent in all those shãstras and the 
only  principle  for  the kalyãn of  the jeev is  simply  this:   Bhagvãn 
creates, maintains, and destroys this entire universe. 
 
21.3
 “Also, in all of those shãstras, there are talks of the charitras of either 
Bhagvãn or  His sant.    So,  a  person  cannot  attain kalyãn just  by 
following the dharma of his varna and ashram, or through its rewards 
in the form of dharma, arth, and kãm.  This is because the observance 
of the dharma on its own may bring worldly reputation and physical 
comforts – but  that  is  all.    However,  to  attain kalyãn,  a  person  must 
realise Bhagvãn to be the all-doer. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 490 - 
21.4
 “In addition, nothing remains to be understood on the path of kalyãn 
if a person realises the greatness of pratyaksha Bhagvãn and His sant 
in exactly the same way as he realises the greatness of past avatãrs of 
Bhagvãn such as Rãm, and Krishna, and the greatness of past sãdhus, 
such   as Nãrad,   the Sanakãdik,   Shukji,   Jadbharat, Hanumãn,   and 
Uddhav. 
 
21.5
 “Whether this principle is understood after being told  once,  or  after 
being told a thousand times; whether it is understood today, or after 
a thousand years, there is no option but to understand it.  If a person 
were  to  ask Nãrad,  the Sanakãdik,  Shukji, Brahma,  and Shiv,  as  they 
are  wise,  even  they  would  point  to pratyaksha Bhagvãn and  the 
pratyaksha sant as  being  the  only  granters  of kalyãn.    They  would 
also  explain  that  the  greatness  of  the pratyaksha svarup of Bhagvãn 
and  the pratyaksha sant  is  exactly  the  same  as  the  greatness  of  past 
svarup of Bhagvãn and His sant. 
 
21.6
 “A  person  who  has  such  a  firm nishchay,   has   grasped   all   the 
fundamental  principles.    What  is  more,  he  will  never  fall  from  the 
path of kalyãn.  Brahmã, Shiv, Bruhaspati, Parãshar, and many others 
may  have  fallen  from  the  path  of dharma due  to  vicious  natures  like 
kãm and krodh,   but   because   they   had   the   same nishchay and 
knowledge    of    the    greatness    of pratyaksha Bhagvãn and    the 
pratyaksha sant as they had of their past lives, they did not fall from 
the  path  of kalyãn.    Therefore,  this  very  fact  is  the  essence  of  all  the 
shãstras.” 
 
21.7
 In  the  evening  of  that  same  day,  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj 
mounted His horse in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã and came to 
Lakshmi-Vãdi.      There,   He   sat   on   a   decorated   bedstead   on   the 
platform  under the  mango  tree.    He  was  wearing  a  white khes and 
had  covered  Himself  with  a  white chãdar.    He  had  also  tied  a  white 
pãgh around His head, with a tassel of yellow flowers hanging from it.  
Bunches  of mogrã flowers  were  placed  upon  His  ears,  and  a  garland 

GADHADÃ II 
- 491 - 
of mogrã flowers was hanging around His neck.  A sabhã of munis, as 
well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
21.8
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Please listen, I wish to ask all of you a 
question.  During the svapna state, when the jeev sees a creation and 
indulges in the pleasures of that creation, does the jeev itself become 
the svarup of the creation?  Or does the jeev create the creation in its 
svapna by its own will?  Also, in the same way as the jeev, the ishvars 
also   experience creations   during   their svapna state.      Do   they 
themselves  become  the svarup of  the  creation?    Or  do  they  create  it 
by  their  own  will?    Or  does Bhagvãn,  who  is  beyond  both jeev and 
ishvar, create the creations experienced in their svapnas?” 
 
21.9
 Everyone attempted to answer the question according to his level of 
intelligence, but no one was able to offer a precise explanation. 
 
21.10
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then explained, “Neither the jeev nor ishvar creates 
the  creations  experienced  during  the svapna state,  and  nor  do  they 
become  the svarup of  those  creations  themselves.    In  reality,  it  is 
Bhagvãn – who  is  beyond  both jeev and ishvar,  and  who  is  also  the 
giver of the rewards of a person’s karmas – who  creates  the  world 
experienced in svapnas according to the karmas of the particular jeev 
or ishvar. 
 
21.11
 “The unstable and deceptive nature of svapnas is  due  to  their  region 
of  origin.    The  throat  is  a  place  where  countless  types  of  such 
creations  can  be  seen – just  as  when  an  oil  lamp  is  lit  in  one  place 
within  a mandir decorated  with  mirrors,  countless  oil  lamps  would 
be  seen.    Therefore,  due  to  the  location  of  its  origin  (the  throat),  a 
single thought can be experienced in countless ways.” 
 
21.12
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “A person possessing gnãn understands 
only  the  influence  of desh to  be  predominant  when  there  is  the 
predominance  of desh;  when  the  influence  of kãl is  predominant,  he 

GADHADÃ II 
- 492 - 
understands  only kãl to  be  predominant;  when  the  influence  of 
karma is    predominant,    he    understands    only karma to    be 
predominant;   and   when Bhagvãn’s influence   is   predominant,   he 
understand only Bhagvãn to be predominant.  In contrast, a fool, once 
he  has  understood  one  factor,  considers  that  alone  to  be  the  main 
principle.    If  he  has  understood kãl,  he  considers kãl to  be  the  main 
principle;  if  he  has  understood karma,  he  considers karma to  be  the 
main principle; and if he has understood mãyã, he considers mãyã to 
be  the  main  principle.    However,  such  a  fool  does  not  know  how  to 
distinguish between the different predominating factors prevalent in 
different  circumstances.    On  the  other  hand,  a  person  with gnãn 
understands the   predominance   of   various   factors   based   on   the 
circumstances. 
 
21.13
 “In fact, it is Bhagvãn who is the inspirer of everything – of desh, kãl, 
karma, and mãyã.  It is He Himself who allows the factors of desh, kãl, 
karma,   and mãyã,   to   be   predominant.      Therefore,   they   are   all 
dependent upon Bhagvãn – just as the shishumãr chakra is dependent 
on  the  support  of  the  Dhruv  star;  and  just  as  all  the  subjects  of  a 
kingdom  are  dependent  on  their  king.    Furthermore,  in  a  kingdom, 
the minister and secretaries can only do as much as their king allows 
them to do; when the king does not allow it, they cannot do even the 
smallest  of  tasks.    In  the  same  way,  the  factors  of desh, kãl, karma, 
and mãyã can  only  do  as  much  as Bhagvãn allows  them  to  do;  they 
cannot do a single thing against the wish of Bhagvãn.  Therefore, only 
Bhagvãn is the all-doer.” 
 
21.14
 After delivering this talk, Shreeji Mahãrãj returned to the darbãr. 
 
21.15
 Later that night, Shreeji Mahãrãj went to the residence of the sãdhus.  
All  the sãdhus bowed  down  to  Him  and  paid  their  respects.    Shreeji 
Mahãrãj then said to the munis, “I have had a thought, which is why I 
have  come  to  you  at  this  hour.    In  my  mind,  I  understand  that 

GADHADÃ II 
- 493 - 
whoever  owns  land  and  money,  is  the  most  unhappy;  and  whoever 
has very little money and no land, is the most happy.  
 
21.16
 “I have built a mandir in  Amdãvãd  Nagar,  and  others  will  also  be 
built.    However,  a  person  should  not  unwilling  donate  money  to  for 
mandirs to be built.  It is the wish of Shree Nar-Nãrãyan if the mandir 
is  built  or  not.    However,  we  should  do  whatever  does  not  cause 
problems for the mandir. 
 
21.17
 “Some festivals, like Janamãshtmi, are celebrated using millions of 
rupees,  due  to  the  grace of Shree  Nar-Nãrãyan.    Sometimes, festivals 
are  celebrated  using  a tulsi leaf.    The  best  way  is  whatever  occurs 
without difficulty.  However, a person should never ask for money for 
the mandir.  Due to a person’s shraddhã in Shree Nar-Nãrãyan, if they 
wish  to  donate  their  land,  they  should  do  so  willingly.    A  person 
should not forcefully ask for anything.” 
 
21.18
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  happily  asked  the sãdhu a question, “Who do 
we call an ekãntik bhakta?” 
 
21.19
 Muktãnand  Swãmi  tried  to  answer  the  question,  but  was  unable  to 
give a satisfactory answer. 
 
21.20
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “A true ekãntik bhakta sees  himself  as 
brahm-rup,   who   strictly   follows   his   own dharma and   performs 
bhakti,  regularly  performs dhyãn and smaran of Bhagvãn,  and  also 
keeps upãsanã of Bhagvãn.      He   makes   sure   that   there   are   no 
alterations  in  the vartmãns followed  by  the  body,  which  have  been 
given  by Bhagvãn.    A  person  with  all  these  qualities  should  be 
regarded as an ekãntik bhakta. 
 
21.21
 “Also, when there is a lack of bhakti on  earth, bhakti remains  within 
Nar-Nãrãyan.    Shree   Nar-Nãrãyan behaves   just   like   the ekãntik 
bhakta to  teach  the bhaktas who  come  to His  feet.   Ekãntik bhaktas 

GADHADÃ II 
- 494 - 
like this are only found in satsang.  In other sects, there is upãsanã of 
Bhagvãn,  but  there  is  no tyãg and ãtmã-gnãn;  in  some  sects  there  is 
ãtmã-gnãn, but no upãsanã and tyãg; in some sects there is tyãg, but 
no upãsanã and ãtmã-gnãn.    However,  at  this  time  in  our satsang, 
there are many bhaktas with all these qualities.”   
 
21.22
 After deliviering this talk, Shreeji Mahãrãj returned to His residence. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 21 || 154 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 22 
Two Armies 
The Installation Of Nar-Nãrãyan Dev  
 
22.1
 In the Samvat year 1878, on Fãgan vad 10 [19
th
 March 1822], Shreeji 
Mahãrãj  awoke  in  the  middle  of  the  night  and  sat  facing  south  on  a 
decorated  bedstead  in front  of  the mandir of Shree Vãsudev-Nãrãyan 
in  Dãdã  Khãchar's darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in 
white clothes.  He called all the sãdhus and haribhaktas together, and 
so they gathered before Him in a sabhã. 
 
22.2
 Addressing the sãdhus, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “I wish to talk, so please 
listen.    When  two  armies  are  prepared  for  combat  and  both  have 
implanted  their  flags  opposite  each  other,  in  their  minds  both  feel, 
‘We  will  capture  their  flag  and  shall  raise  our  own  in  its  place’.  
However,  they  never  think, ‘Along the way to the enemy’s flag  many 
heads will roll, and rivers of blood will flow’.    In  this  way,  they  are 
never  afraid.    This  is  because  those  who  are  brave  are  not  afraid  of 
dying.    However,  a  coward  has  thousands  of  thoughts  of  fleeing.    He 
also thinks, ‘If our army wins, we shall steal the wealth and weapons of 
our opponents’.    In  comparison,  the  brave  soldiers  of  both  kings  are 
not  afraid  of  dying,  and  nor  do  they  have  greedy  motives  to  steal.  
Instead,  they  have  only  one  desire – to capture the opponent’s flag 
and ensure their own victory.   

GADHADÃ II 
- 495 - 
22.3
 “Now, in this example, the flag represents the dhãm of Bhagvãn,  and 
the   brave   soldiers   of   the   kings   represent   that   loyal bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn.    Regardless  of  whether  they  encounter  honours  or  insults 
in  this  world;  regardless  of  whether they  encounter  bodily  comforts 
or  miseries;  regardless  of  whether  their  bodies  remain  healthy  or 
unhealthy;  and  regardless  of  whether  their  bodies  survive  or  die, 
loyal bhaktas of Bhagvãn never have weak thoughts such as, ‘We will 
suffer this much pain’, or ‘We will enjoy this much happiness’.  Neither 
of these two types of thoughts arise within their minds.  Such bhaktas 
firmly  believe, ‘We want to attain the dhãm of Bhagvãn within this 
very  lifetime;  we  do  not  want  to  become  tempt  by  anything  along  the 
way’. 
 
22.4
 “On the other hand, a bhakta of Bhagvãn who identifies himself with 
the  body  is  represented  by  the  coward  soldiers.    While  worshipping 
Bhagvãn, he has thousands of weak thoughts such as, ‘If the vartmãn 
become  strict,  I  will  not  be  able  to  survive;  only  if  they  are  easy  to 
follow will I be able to survive’.  He also thinks, ‘If I employ this method, 
I shall be happy even in worldly life.  Also, if it is possible, I shall survive 
passively in satsang’.  Such a bhakta represents the coward.  However, 
a  loyal  and  brave bhakta of Bhagvãn never  has  any  types  of  desires 
related to the body or the world.” 
 
22.5
 Having said this, Shreeji Mahãrãj then began to narrate an experience 
of His own.  “When I went to Amdãvãd to install the murti of Shree 
Nar-Nãrãyan   Dev,  thousands  of  people  gathered  for  the  festival.  
Following  the  completion  of  the  installation  of Shree  Nar-Nãrãyan 
Dev, and after thousands of brãhmans from Amdãvãd had been fed, I 
departed from there and spent the night in Jetalpur.  There, I began to 
think, ‘I want to forget all memories of all of those people and all the 
activities I saw’.    In  doing  this,  I  felt  intense  grief  in  my  heart.    As  a 
result,  I  became  ill.    From  there,  I  went  to  Dholkã, where  I spent  the 
night.    Then,  walking  from  Dholkã  with  the  same  thought  in  mind,  I 
reached  the  forest  of  Ganesh  Dholkã  near  the  village  of  Koth  and 

GADHADÃ II 
- 496 - 
spent the night there.  I began to think so much that I forgot all about 
my  body.    While  thinking,  I  forgot  all  the  activities,  and  dispelled  all 
those thoughts in such a way that it was as if  I had not even stayed at 
Lake  Kãnkariã,  and  as  if  there  had  been  no  festival;  no  thoughts 
remained at all. 
 
22.6
 “After those worldly thoughts had subsided, I began to look within.  I 
began  to  see alokik powers  and  also  the  pleasures  of  the devs.    I 
began  to  see  countless  types  of  heavenly  vehicles, apsãrãs,  clothes, 
and  jewellery – just  as  if  I  were  seeing  them  here  in  Mrutyu-Lok.  
However,   in   my   heart   I   did   not   like   anything   except Bhagvãn.  
Moreover, just as the panch-vishays here appear to be insignificant to 
me – with my mind never being tempted – in the same way, my mind 
was not tempted anywhere from Dev-Lok all the way to Brahm-Lok. 
 
22.7
 “Seeing this, all the devs began to praise me, ‘You truly are an ekãntik 
bhakta of Bhagvãn; after all, your mind did not abandon Bhagvãn and 
become tempted elsewhere’.  On hearing their words, my heart gained 
a  lot  of courage.   I  then told my man, ‘I know your true svarup.  So, if 
you  have  a  thought  about  any  object  other  than  Bhagvãn,  I  will  crush 
you to pieces’.  In  the  same  way,  I  told  my buddhi, ‘If you have any 
belief  other  than  that  of  Bhagvãn,  then  you  will  be  in  trouble’.  
Similarly,  I  told  my chitt, ‘If you think about anything other than 
Bhagvãn, then I will also crush you to pieces’.  In the same way, I told 
my ahankãr, ‘If  you  have  any  form  of  arrogance  except  that  of 
servitude towards Bhagvãn, I will destroy you’. 
 
22.8
 “Following  this,  just  as  I  had  totally  forgotten  all  the  objects  of  this 
lok,  I  also  totally  forgot  all  the  objects  of  Dev-lok  and  Brahm-Lok.  
When all of those thoughts were dispelled, the illness that had arisen 
as  a  result  of  those  thoughts  also  disappeared.    Therefore,  a  person 
who  is  a bhakta of Bhagvãn should behave in this way.”  Shreeji 
Mahãrãj  narrated  His  own  experiences  for  the  sake  of  the kalyãn of 
His bhaktas,  while  in  reality;  He  Himself  is  the pratyaksha svarup of 
Shree Krishna Purushottam Nãrãyan. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 497 - 
22.9
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “The Vãsudev Mahãtmya describes the 
dharma of an ekãntik bhakta as follows:  ‘An ekãntik bhakta does not 
believe  his  body  to  be  his  own  true  svarup;  he  believes  himself  to  be 
composed   of   chaitanya.      He   performs   bhakti   of Bhagvãn   while 
observing svadharma, gnãn, and vairãgya.  Also, he maintains no desire 
for any object other than Bhagvãn’.  When  he  becomes  such  a sãdhu 
by  worshipping Bhagvãn in  this  way,  there  is  no  greater  status.    For 
example, in a kingdom, the queen’s authority is equal to that of the 
king.    In  the  same  way,  that sãdhu possesses  as  much  majesty  as 
Bhagvãn.    Therefore,  a sãdhu should  not  wish  for  the  insignificant 
pleasures of worldly life.  This is because when that sãdhu attains the 
dhãm of Bhagvãn,  then  just  as  the  lords  of  countless  millions  of 
brahmãnds bring countless types of gifts for Bhagvãn, they also bring 
them  for  that sãdhu.    Moreover,  by  the  grace  of Bhagvãn,  that sãdhu 
acquires alokik powers and strength.  Keeping such a great thought in 
the  mind,  a  person  should  not  desire  anything  other  than Bhagvãn.  
For  example,  a  person  who  has  obtained  a chintãmani should  look 
after  it  with  great  care.    This  is  because  it will  enable  him  to  obtain 
any object he desires.  Similarly, a bhakta of Bhagvãn should hold on 
to  the chintãmani in  the  form  of Bhagvãn’s murti;  he  should  never 
abandon it.  Only then will he attain everything.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 22 || 154 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 23 
Heat And Frost 
 
23.1
 In  the Samvat year  1878,  on   Jyeshth sud 11  [31
st
 May  1822],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  in  front  of  the mandir of 
Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He 
was wearing a white khes and had also covered Himself with a white 
chãdar.  He had tied a white pãgh around His head.  A sabhã of munis, 
as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 498 - 
23.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Today, I thought about the nature of the 
mind.    It  appears  that  the  mind  is  not  separate  from  the jeev;  it  is  a 
reflection  of  the jeev itself,  but  not  separate  from  it.    I  also  observed 
that the nature of the mind is like the heat of summer and the frost of 
winter.  Just as a person can die from heat or frost, in the same way, 
when  the  mind  travels  towards  the vishays via  the indriyas,  if  those 
vishays are full of miseries, the mind becomes ‘hot’ like the heat of 
summer;  and  if  those vishays are  full  of  happiness,  then  the  mind 
becomes ‘cold’ like the frost of winter.  Specifically, when the mind – 
having  indulged  in  those vishays which  are  full  of misery and having 
become ‘hot’ like the scorching winds of summer heat – enters  a 
person’s heart, it makes the person  extremely  miserable  and  forces 
him  to  fall  from  the  path of kalyãn.    Such  a  person  should  be  known 
to  have  died  from  the  effects  of  heat.    When  the  mind – having 
indulged  in  the  pleasures  of  those vishays that  are  full  of  happiness 
and having become ‘cold’ like frost – enters a person’s heart, it makes 
that  person  satisfied,  and  causes  him  to  fall  from  the  path  of kalyãn.  
He should be known to have died due to frost. 
 
23.3
 “However, a person whose mind remains unmoved – it  does  not 
become  ‘hot’  upon   experiencing   repulsive vishays and   does   not 
become ‘cold’ upon experiencing pleasurable vishays – should  be 
known as a param-bhãgvat sant.  However, it is no small achievement 
to develop the mind in this way. 
 
23.4
 “Moreover, the mind is like a child.  If  a  child  attempts  to  grasp  a 
snake,  or  touch  a  flame,  or  perhaps  hold  an  unsheathed  sword,  it 
becomes  upset  when  it  is  not  allowed  to  do  so;  and  even  if  it  is 
allowed  to  do  so,  it  will  be  hurt  and  upset.    Similarly,  if  the  mind  is 
not  allowed  to  indulge  in  them,  it  turns  away  from Bhagvãn,  and 
becomes extremely miserable.  Therefore, only a person whose mind 
has a craving for Bhagvãn and which becomes neither ‘hot’ nor ‘cold’ 
by the vishays, should be known as a sãdhu.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 23 || 156 || 

GADHADÃ II 
- 499 - 
Gadhadã II – 24 
Firmness In Sãnkhya And In Yog 
 
24.1
 In  the Samvat year  1879,  on Shrãvan sud 8  [26
th
 July  1822],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  arrived  at  Lakshmi-Vãdi  on  horseback 
from Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  There, He sat on a platform 
facing  north.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    He  was 
wearing  a  garland  of mogrã flowers  around  His  neck,  and a  tassel  of 
mogrã flowers was also inserted in His pãgh.  A sabhã of paramhans, 
as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
24.2
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked Shreeji Mahãrãj, “Mahãrãj, does a 
bhakta who  has  firm  belief  in Bhagvãn experience  any  obstacles,  or 
not?” 
 
24.3
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A bhakta may  be  firm  in  two  ways:    One  is 
by  being  firm  in yog,  and  the  other  is  by  being  firm  in sãnkhya.    Of 
these, a bhakta who is firm in yog keeps his vrutti constantly fixed on 
the svarup of Bhagvãn.  A bhakta who is firm in sãnkhya understands 
the extent of human pleasures, as well as the extent of the pleasures 
of  the  great yogis, chãrans, vidyãdhars, gandharvas,  and devs.    In 
addition, he considers the pleasures of the fourteen loks and believes, 
‘These pleasures are only so much’.    He  also  considers  the  miseries 
that   follow   those   pleasures.      As   a   result,   he   develops vairãgya 
towards  those  misery-filled  pleasures,  and  maintains  profound  love 
only for Bhagvãn.  So, a person who is firm in sãnkhya possesses the 
strength of understanding. 
 
24.4
 “In comparison, the strength of a person who  is  firm  in yog is  based 
only on keeping his vrutti constantly on the svarup of Bhagvãn.  If he 
were     to     encounter     some     disturbances     due     to     unpleasant 
circumstances,   then   although   his vrutti was   originally   fixed   on 
Bhagvãn’s svarup, it would become attached elsewhere as well.  This 
is because a person who is firm in yog somewhere lacks the strength 
of  understanding.    Therefore,  it  is  possible  that  such  a bhakta may 
experience obstacles. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 500 - 
24.5
 “However, if a person is firm in both sãnkhya and yog,  then  there 
would be no problem whatsoever.  Such a bhakta of Bhagvãn is never 
tempted by any other object than the murti of Bhagvãn.  He realises, 
‘With the exception of Bhagvãn’s Akshardhãm, and Bhagvãn’s murti 
and the bhaktas within Akshardhãm, everything else – all the loks, the 
devs,  and  the  wealth  of  the  devs – is perishable’.    Realising  this,  he 
maintains  profound  love  only  for Bhagvãn.    Such  a bhakta never 
experiences any sort of obstacles whatsoever.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 24 || 157 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 25 
A Tyãgi With Worldly Desires, And A Grahastha With No Desires 
 
25.1
 In the Samvat year 1879, on Shrãvan vad 6 [8
th
 August 1822], Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on 
the veranda outside the south-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr 
in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of 
munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from various  places,  had  gathered 
before Him. 
 
25.2
 Addressing all the paramhans, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Please listen, as 
I wish to ask you a question.  First, suppose there is a tyãgi bhakta of 
Bhagvãn who  is  strict  in  following  the  physical vartmãn.    However, 
within  his  heart,  he  has  an  intense  desire  to  indulge  in  the vishays.  
Nevertheless, he does not physically give in to those desires.  Such is 
the tyãgi.  There is another bhakta who is a grahastha.  Physically, he 
has  close  contact  with  both  women  and  wealth.    However,  in  his 
heart, he is free of all worldly desires.  So, the question is what will be 
their  fate  after  death?    Will  they  both  attain  the  same  state?    Or  will 
one  become  superior  to  the  other?    Please  consider  the  differences 
between the two and give an answer for each separately. 
 
25.3
 Then,  Gopãlãnand  Swãmi  replied,  “When  the tyãgi passes  away, 
because  of  the  intense  desires  in  his  heart  to  indulge  in  the vishays, 

GADHADÃ II 
- 501 - 
Bhagvãn will  make  him  a  wealthy grahastha either  in  this  Mrutyu-
Lok  or  in  Dev-Lok,  where  he  will  attain  a  great  amount  of vishays to 
indulge in.  In fact, in Dev-Lok, he will indulge in vishays like those of 
a person who had strayed from his spiritual activities as described in 
the Bhagvad Geetã. 
 
25.4
 “On the other hand, when the grahastha bhakta passes away, because 
he  is  free  of  worldly  desires,  he  will  attain  the dhãm of Bhagvãn – 
Brahmpur – where he will reside at the holy feet of Bhagvãn. 
 
25.5
 “As far as the tyãgi is  concerned,  when  he  becomes  satisfied  after 
indulging in the vishays, he will eventually develop vairãgya towards 
them;  and  then,  feeling  guilty  in  his  mind,  he  will  engage  in  the 
worship  of Bhagvãn.    Then,  he  will  become  free  of  worldly  desires 
and attain the dhãm of Bhagvãn.” 
 
25.6
 Hearing this, Shreeji Mahãrãj commented, “Correct.  That is the exact 
answer to the question.” 
 
25.7
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “If a person has such strong worldly 
desires  and  wishes  to  eradicate  them,  by  which  method  can  they  be 
eradicated?” 
 
25.8
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Just as Ukã Khãchar has become addicted to 
serving the sãdhus, in the same way, if a person becomes addicted to 
serving Bhagvãn and His sant to the extent that he would not be able 
to stay for even a moment without serving them, then all the impure 
desires in his antah-karans will be destroyed.” 
 
25.9
 Then, Svayamprakãshãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, by which means 
is Bhagvãn extremely pleased?” 
 
25.10
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If a bhakta who  once  had  only  twenty 
kilograms of grains in his house were to attain the control of a village, 
or  the  control  of  five  villages,  or  the  control  of  fifty  villages,  or  the 

GADHADÃ II 
- 502 - 
control  of  one  hundred  villages,  or  even  the  control  of  the  entire 
world;  and  after  this, if  he  remains  just  as  loving  and  humble  with  a 
sant as he was when he was poor and modest, and if he remains just 
as  humble  even  if  he  were  to  attain  the  kingdom  of  Indra-Lok  and 
Brahm-Lok, then Bhagvãn would be extremely pleased upon him. 
 
25.11
 “As for a tyãgi, even after attaining powers similar to those possessed 
by Bhagvãn, if he can continue to serve all sãdhus in exactly the same 
way as he did when he was new and timid, and not attempt to impose 
his  authority  upon  other sãdhus or  try  to  compete  with  them,  then 
Bhagvãn would be extremely pleased with him.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 25 || 158 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 26 
Obstactles Of Bhakti 
That Which Displeases Bhagvãn Should Not Be Done 
 
26.1
 In  the  Samvat  year  1879,  on  the  night  of Bhãdarvã sud 11  [29
th
 
August  1822],  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  in  front  of  the mandir of 
Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He 
was dressed entirely in white clothes.  A sabhã of paramhans, as well 
as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
26.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “A bhakta of Bhagvãn should  never  do 
anything that displeases Bhagvãn and His bhaktas, and he should also 
abandon all those who obstruct him in worshipping Bhagvãn, even if 
they are his own relatives.  Also, just as a person abandons an enemy, 
he   should   abandon   any svabhãv that   does   not   please Bhagvãn.  
Furthermore, he should never support those who are vimukhs, just as 
Bharatji  did  not  support his  own mother.   Also,  a bhakta of Bhagvãn 
should mainly perceive avgun in himself.  On the other hand, a person 
who  perceives avgun in  others  and  only gun in  himself,  may  be 
known as a satsangi, but he should be known to be half-fallen. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 503 - 
26.3
 “Furthermore, for a bhakta of Bhagvãn, if gnãn of the ãtmã, vairãgya, 
or dharma are  an  obstacle  in  his bhakti towards Bhagvãn,  then  he 
should suppress even them and maintain the predominance of bhakti 
only.  However, if they are supportive in offering bhakti, then they are 
fine.    Only  a  person  who  has  this  understanding  can  be  called  a 
complete bhakta of Bhagvãn. 
 
26.4
 “Also, no matter how great he may be, if a person perceives avgun in 
others  and gun in  himself,  he  will  certainly  encounter  obstacles  on 
the path of kalyãn.  For example, Rãdhikãji was great and she also had 
intense  love  for Bhagvãn.    However,  when  she  perceived gun in 
herself  and avgun in Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn,  a  trace  of tamo-gun 
entered  into  her  love  for  Him.    Then,  she  quarrelled  with Shree 
Krishna Bhagvãn and  Shreedãmã.   As  a  result  of  this,  Shreedãmã 
cursed her.  Rãdhikãji then fell from Golok, and took birth in the home 
of  a  carpenter.    She  had  to  marry  a  man  other  than Bhagvãn,  and 
suffered   a   severe   disgrace.      Even   Shreedãmã   perceived gun in 
himself,  and  perceived avgun in Rãdhikãji.    For  that  reason,  he  was 
cursed by Rãdhikãji and had to become a demon. 
 
26.5
 “However, this is not the way of falling from the dhãm of Bhagvãn; for 
those  who  have  fallen  have  done  so  due  to Bhagvãn’s will.    After  all, 
Bhagvãn has declared, ‘Even a person who is as great as Rãdhikãji will 
fall  if  he  perceives  gun  in  himself  and  perceives  avgun  in  bhaktas  of 
Bhagvãn.  If that is so, what can be said of others?’  Therefore, a bhakta 
of Bhagvãn should see  only gun in  all satsangis and  should  find only 
avgun in himself.  If a person has such an understanding, then even if 
he  is  not  very  intelligent,  his satsang still  becomes  stronger  day  by 
day.    Without  it,  even  if  he  is  very  intelligent,  he  will  fall  back  from 
satsang; and in the end will certainly become a vimukh. 
 
26.6
 “Also, the following practice is observed everywhere:  When a king or 
a guru lectures and disciplines a servant or a shishya, if the servant or 
shishya accepts   it   positively,   then   the   king   or   the guru has 

GADHADÃ II 
- 504 - 
tremendous  affection  for him.    However,  they  do  not  feel  affection 
towards  a  person  who  reacts  negatively  when  given  such  advice.  
Bhagvãn’s method  is  similar.    When  He  gives  advice  to  someone,  if 
they  accept  it  positively,  He  develops  affection  for  them;  and  if  they 
react negatively, He does not develop affection for them.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 26 || 159 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 27 
Mandirs Built For Bhakti And Upãsanã 
 
27.1
 In  the Samvat year  1879,  on Kãrtik sud 11  [25
th
 November  1822], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   the   veranda 
outside the south-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  
He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A  garland  of  white  and 
yellow guldãvadi flowers  adorned  His  neck,  and  tassels  hung  from 
both sides of His pãgh.  A sabhã of paramhans as well as haribhaktas 
from various places had gathered before Him. 
 
27.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked Muktãnand Swãmi, “What causes krodh 
to arise within you?  Also, how much of that cause does it take for you 
to become angry?  As for me, even if someone spends anything from 
one  to  one  hundred  thousand  rupees,  I  would  not  become  angry  for 
my  own  sake.    However,  if  someone  disobeys  his  own dharma,  or  if 
an arrogant person abuses a humble person, or if someone sides with 
injustice, then for the sake of another person, I do become angry for a 
brief  moment;  but  never  do  I  become  angry  for  my  own  sake.    Even 
when  I  do  express krodh for  the  sake  of  another  person,  it  does  not 
last for even a second, nor is any grudge formed.  So, my question to 
you   is   what   causes krodh to   arise   within   you   and   how   is   it 
eradicated?” 
 
27.3
 Muktãnand Swãmi relied, “Krodh arises due to association with some 
objects or on seeing evil in a person; but it subsides instantly.” 

GADHADÃ II 
- 505 - 
27.4
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked,  “By  what  thought  process  do  you 
manage to do that?” 
  
27.5
 Muktãnand Swãmi replied, “First, by thinking of Bhagvãn’s greatness, 
I  realise, ‘I do not wish to retain any  svabhãvs  that  would  displease 
Bhagvãn’.    Secondly,  after  examining  the  path  of sãdhus like  Shukji 
and Jadbharat, I think, ‘Such an inappropriate svabhãv does not suit a 
sãdhu’.” 
 
27.6
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj commented, “Such a thought that is capable of 
repelling the force of kãm and krodh, is beyond the gun of Mãyã, and 
it is firm in your jeev.  In fact, such thoughts that repel the influence of 
kãm and krodh are  due  to  the sanskãrs of  past  lives.    Also,  regarding 
your nature, I know this much:  Initially, you may become attached to 
worldly  objects  that  you  come  across,  but  in  the  end,  you  do  not 
remain attached to them; you are capable of breaking that bondage.” 
 
27.7
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi questioned, “Why does the deficiency of 
becoming influenced in the first place still remain?” 
 
27.8
 Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Each of the eight factors of desh, kãl, kriyã, 
sang, dhyãn, mantra, dikshã,  and shãstra, has  a  force  equal  to  that  of 
the  past sanskãrs.    Therefore,  when  a  person  encounters  them,  they 
overpower the force of the past sanskãrs.  After all, if good deeds and 
bad deeds are performed only by the influence of a person’s sanskãrs, 
then  all  the  distinctions  of vidhi and nishedh – ‘This should be done 
and this should not be done’ – as  prescribed  in  the  Veds,  the  six-
shãstras,  and  the  Purãns,  would  become  meaningless.    But,  these 
shãstras,  which  have  been  written  by  the  great,  can  never  become 
false. 
 
27.9
 “Just see, Jay and Vijay behaved improperly, and as a result they fell 
from the dhãm of Bhagvãn, where there is no influence of Kãl, karma, 
or Mãyã.    On  the  other  hand,  Prahlãd  pleased Nãradji and  therefore, 
even  though  circumstances  were  unpleasant,  they  were  unable  to 

GADHADÃ II 
- 506 - 
obstruct him.  However, even though circumstances were pleasant in 
Jay  and  Vijay’s case, because the Sanakãdik were  angered,  Jay  and 
Vijay fell from the dhãm of Bhagvãn.  Therefore, a person who wishes 
to  attain kalyãn should  do  whatever  pleases  the  great sant.    Such  a 
sant becomes pleased when there are no traces of impure desires left 
within a person’s heart. 
 
27.10
 “A person should keep in mind, that a person who has krodh and 
other  vicious  natures  towards  a  humble  person,  will  develop  such 
feelings  towards  the  great,  and  then  also  towards  his ishta-dev.  
Therefore,  a  person  wishing to  attain kalyãn should  not  have  any 
vicious  feelings  towards  anyone;  and  if  he  does,  then  he  is  sure  to 
develop  hatred  towards bhaktas of Bhagvãn,  and  then  eventually 
towards Bhagvãn as well. 
 
27.11
 “That  is  why  if  I  have  upset  even  one  humble  person,  I think, 
‘Bhagvãn resides as antaryãmi in all.  While staying in one place, He 
knows what is in everyone’s heart.  So, since He must also be present in 
the heart of the person whom I have upset, I have offended Bhagvãn as 
well’.    Realising  this,  I  bow  down  to  him,  give  him  whatever  he 
wishes, and do whatever is necessary to please him.” 
 
27.12
 Having said this, Shreeji Mahãrãj continued, “I have thought and 
realised  that  if  a  person  maintains  too  much tyãg or  too  much 
compassion,   then   he   cannot   offer bhakti towards Bhagvãn,   and 
therefore  causing  him  to  betray  his upãsanã.    For  example,  from  the 
past,  we  notice  that upãsanã eventually  perished  in  those  who  were 
extreme tyãgis.   Therefore,  having  thought  about  this,  and  for  the 
sake of preserving upãsanã, I have relaxed the emphasis on tyãg and 
have built mandirs of Bhagvãn.  So, even if only a little tyãg remains, 
upãsanã will  at  least  be  preserved,  and  through  it,  many jeevs will 
attain kalyãn. 
 
27.13
 “On the other hand, how is it possible for a person who wishes to 
offer bhakti to Bhagvãn to retain compassion like that of Jain sãdhus?  

GADHADÃ II 
- 507 - 
After  all,  a bhakta is  required  to  pick  flowers  and tulsi for Bhagvãn; 
he  is  required  to  bring  various  types  of  vegetables,  and  to  grow 
gardens  for Bhagvãn;  he  must  also  build mandirs.    Therefore,  a 
person  who  sits  idly,  maintaining  extreme tyãg and  compassion,  is 
unable  to  offer bhakti to Bhagvãn.    When bhakti diminishes,  the 
upãsanã of Bhagvãn is   also   destroyed,   and   a   lineage   of   blind 
followers  results.    That  is  why  I  have  had mandirs built – for  the 
purpose of preserving Bhagvãn’s upãsanã forever. 
 
27.14
 “Moreover, a bhakta with upãsanã never  deviates  from  his dharma.  
Therefore,  my  principle  is  to  perform  the bhakti and upãsanã of 
Bhagvãn while maintaining dharma.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 27 || 160 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 28 
Serving A Bhakta Pleases Bhagvan 
 
28.1
 In  the Samvat year  1879,  on Fãgan sud 2  [13
th
 February,  1823], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  facing  west  on  a 
square  platform  at  His  residence  in  Dãdã  Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Gadhadã.  He was wearing a white khes and had covered Himself with 
a  white chãdar.    He  had  also  tied  a  white pãgh around  His  head.    A 
sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had 
gathered before Him. 
 
28.2
 Then,  Prãgji  Davé  said,  “There  is  no shãstra like   the   Shreemad 
Bhãgvat.”  
 
28.3
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “Yes,  the  Shreemad Bhãgvat  is  certainly 
good,  but  there  is  no shãstra like  the  Vãsudev  Mahãtmya,  which  is  a 
part of the Skand Purãn.  After all, in that shãstra, great emphasis has 
been placed on dharma, bhakti, gnãn, and vairãgya, as well as ahinsã.” 

GADHADÃ II 
- 508 - 
28.4
 Having  said  this,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  continued, “The Vãlmiki Rãmãyan 
and  Harivansh  have  placed  great  emphasis  on hinsã.    In  fact,  even 
Rãmchandraji behaved according to the characteristics of a kshatriya.  
Even  though Rãmchandraji protected  anyone  who  sought  refuge  at 
His  feet,  He  would  immediately abandon  them  if  they  committed 
even  the  slightest  mistake.    For  example,  even  though Sitãji became 
subject  to  only  minor  public  criticism,  He  instantly  abandoned  her, 
even though she was very dear to him.” 
 
28.5
 Hearing this, Muktãnand Swãmi commented, “Rãmãnand Swãmi’s 
nature was similar.” 
 
28.6
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj revealed, “My nature is not like that.  I have 
great compassion for bhaktas of Bhagvãn.  Of the Pãndavs, Arjun was 
also  of  a  very  compassionate  nature.    Amongst  all  men,  there  has 
been  no  man like Rãmchandraji and  Arjun,  and  amongst  all  women 
there has been no woman like Sitãji and Draupadi. 
 
28.7
 “Now,  I  shall  describe  my  own  nature.    Even  though  I  have  a 
compassionate  nature,  if  a  person  spites bhaktas of Bhagvãn,  then  I 
have  a  dislike  towards  that  person.    If  I  hear  someone  speaking 
unpleasantly  of bhaktas,  then  I  would  not  feel  like speaking  to  them, 
even if I had to.  On the other hand, I become extremely pleased with 
someone  who  serves  the bhaktas of Bhagvãn.    In  fact,  my  nature  is 
such  that  I  do  not  become  easily  pleased  or  displeased  over  small 
matters,  but  only  after  observation  over  several  days  of  whether  a 
person is worthy of my pleasure or displeasure, do I become pleased 
or  displeased.    I  never  become  pleased  or  displeased  with  a  person 
by  simply  hearing  someone’s  opinions  of  that  person;  I  only 
appreciate  those  qualities  that  I  perceive  with  my  own  mind.    Also, 
my  preference  is  as  follows: ‘If  a  person is a  genuine bhakta of 
Bhagvãn, then I am a bhakta of that bhakta, and I do the bhakti of such 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn’.  This is my greatest quality.  A person who does 
not have that quality is not worthy of any type of greatness. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 509 - 
28.8
 “Conversely, those who have perceived avgun in bhaktas of Bhagvãn, 
even  though  they  were  very  great,  have  fallen  from  their  status  of 
importance.    Those  who  progress  do  so  only  by  serving bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn,  and  those  who  regress  do  so  only  by  spiting bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn.    In  fact,  the only  method  for  a  person  to please Bhagvãn is 
to  serve bhaktas by  thought,  word,  and  deed.    The  only  method  to 
displease Bhagvãn is to spite bhaktas. 
 
28.9
 “Therefore, my principle is that if Bhagvãn is  pleased  with me,  and  I 
have  the  company  of  the bhaktas of Bhagvãn,  then  even  if  I  were  to 
stay far away from Bhagvãn for countless years, I would not feel any 
grief mentally.  On the other hand, if Bhagvãn is not pleased with me, 
then even if I were to stay near Bhagvãn, I would not consider that to 
be good.  Moreover, the essence of all the shãstras is ‘A person should 
only do that which pleases Bhagvãn’.  In  fact,  a  person  who  does  not 
do that which pleases Bhagvãn should be known to have fallen from 
the path of Bhagvãn. 
 
28.10
 “If a person has the company of the bhaktas of Bhagvãn and also has 
earned Bhagvãn’s pleasure, then even though he is in Mrutyu-Lok, he 
is still in the dhãm of Bhagvãn.  This is because a person who serves a 
sant and  earns Bhagvãn’s favour  will  certainly  stay  near Bhagvãn.  
Conversely,  even  if  a bhakta is in  the dhãm of Bhagvãn,  if he has  not 
earned Bhagvãn’s favour  and  is  jealous  of bhaktas of Bhagvãn,  then 
that bhakta will certainly fall from that dhãm. 
 
28.11
 “For this reason, in order to please Bhagvãn,  I  desire  only  to  serve 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn in this life and all subsequent lives.  Furthermore, 
just as this is my belief, all of you should also make the same belief.” 
 
28.12
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi and all the other bhaktas folded their hands 
in prayer and said, “Mahãrãj, we also wish to keep such a belief.”  
Having   said   this,   all   the bhaktas pledged   and   bowed   at   Shreeji 
Mahãrãj’s feet. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 510 - 
28.13
 Finally, Shreeji Mahãrãj added, “I have delivered this talk to you after 
hearing  and  extracting  the  essence  from  the  Veds,  the  six-shãstras, 
the Purãns and all other words on this earth relating to moksh.  This 
is the most profound and fundamental principle, and it is the essence 
of all essences.  For all those who have previously attained moksh, for 
all  those  who  will  attain  it  in  the  future,  and  for  all  those  who  are 
presently treading the path of moksh, this talk is like a lifeline.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã I || 28 || 162 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 29 
The Characteristics Of A Person Who Is Attached To Bhagvãn 
 
29.1
 In  the Samvat year  1879,  on Fãgan sud 8  [18
th
 February  1823], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  north-facing  rooms  of  Dada 
Khãchar's darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from various places 
had gathered before Him. 
 
29.2
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “A bhakta whose   mind   has   become 
deeply  attached  to  the svarup of Shree Krishna Bhagvãn has  the 
following characteristics: Firstly, even though they may be extremely 
exhausted after prolonged walking and do not have enough strength 
left  in  their  body  even  to  sit  upright,  if  an  opportunity  to  talk  about 
Bhagvãn arises,   then   he   becomes   attentive   and   most   willing   to 
narrate  and  hear  such  talks – as  if  he  has  not  walked  even  a  single 
mile.    Also,  regardless  of  any  disease  or  illness  that  may  be  a  source 
of  pain  for  them,  and  regardless  of  being  insulted,  if  they  hear  talks 
about Bhagvãn,  then  they  would  instantly  be  relieved  of  all  their 
miseries.    Furthermore,  they  may  appear  to  be  totally  engrossed  in 
the  wealth  and  property  they  have  attained,  but  the  moment  they 
hear  talks  of Bhagvãn,  it  would  seem  as  if  they  have  no  association 

GADHADÃ II 
- 511 - 
with  anything  else.    This  would  be  their  eagerness  to  listen  to  talks 
about Bhagvãn.    A  person  who  has  these  characteristics  should  be 
known to have developed deep attachment to Bhagvãn.” 
 
29.3
 Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “How does such deep attachment 
towards Bhagvãn develop?” 
 
29.4 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Either due to very strong sanskãrs from past 
lives, or  by  serving  and  therefore  pleasing  the sant of Bhagvãn who 
has  such  firm  attachment  with Bhagvãn – these  two  methods  help 
create  deep  attachment  towards Bhagvãn.    Besides  these,  there  are 
no other methods.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 29 || 162 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 30 
Women And Gold 
 
30.1 
In  the Samvat year  1879,  on sud 9  of  the second  Chaitra [19
th
 April 
1823],  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress 
with  a  large, cylindrical  pillow  on  the  veranda  outside  the mandir of 
Shree Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He 
was  wearing  a  white khes and  had  covered  Himself  with  a  white 
chãdar.    He  had  tied  a  black-bordered  cloth  around  His  head,  and  a 
tassel of flowers was hanging from His pãgh.  He was also wearing a 
garland  of  flowers  around  His  neck.    A sabhã of sãdhus,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
30.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “The Shreemad Bhãgvat and the other 
sacred shãstras are satya;  so  reality  reflects  what  is  stated  in  those 
shãstras.  Just see, in the Shreemad Bhãgvat, it is said that Kali (Kali-
Yug) resides in gold; and for that reason, I do not like even the sight 
of  gold.    Also,  like  gold,  beauty  is  a  source  of  attachment.    After  all, 

GADHADÃ II 
- 512 - 
when  a  beautiful  woman  enters a sabhã,  even  the  most  composed 
person  cannot  remain  without  being  drawn  towards  her  beauty.  
Therefore, gold and women are the source of extreme attachment. 
 
30.3
 “A person does not become attached to gold and women when he 
realises the pure chaitanya brahm as the only satya; when he realises 
that brahm to  be  his  own  self;  when  he  becomes brahm-rup and 
worships Shree Krishna Bhagvãn, who is Parbrahm; when he realises 
Prakruti and all the entities which have evolved from it – all of which 
are  below Brahm – as  being asatya,  perishable,  and  worthless;  and 
when  he  views  all mãyik names  and  forms  as  flawed  and  develops 
intense vairãgya towards  all  those  names  and  forms.    Only  under 
these  conditions  do  gold  and  women  not  bind  a  person;  otherwise, 
they most certainly will cause a person to become bound by them.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 30 || 163 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 31 
Jeev, Ishvar, Mãyã, Brahm, Parbrahm 
 
31.1
 In  the Samvat year  1880,  on Shrãvan sud 4  [10
th
 August  1823], 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress  with  a  large,  cylindrical 
pillow that had been placed on a square platform at His residence in 
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was dressed entirely in white 
clothes.  He had also tied a black-bordered cloth around His head.  A 
sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places  had 
gathered  before  Him.    At  that  time,  the  Kapil  Geetã  (a  section  of  the 
Shreemad Bhãgvat) was being read by the Prãgji Davé. 
 
31.2 
Following   the   reading,   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   said   to   the paramhans, 
“Vãsudev Bhagvãn – who is Purushottam, the cause of all causes, and 
who  is  greater  than Akshar – implants  masculine  power  in Mahã-
Mãyã through Mahã-Purush.    That Purush is  like Akshar,  he  is  a 

GADHADÃ II 
- 513 - 
mukta,  and  he  is  also  known as Brahm.    When  that Purush implants 
his masculine power in Mãyã, Virãt-Purush is said to be the son of its 
respective Purush.    Just  as  a brãhman,  a kshatriya,  a vaishya, or 
another  man  of  this  world  produces  a  son  with  his  wife,  similarly, 
Virãt-Purush is also produced. 
 
31.3 
“That Virãt-Purush is  just  like  this jeev,  and  his  actions  are  also 
similar to the jeev.  The lifespan of that Virãt-Purush is two parãrdhs.  
The  creation,  sustenance,  and  destruction  of  this  universe  are  his 
three states, just as jãgrat, svapna, and sushupti are the three states of 
the jeev.   Virãt, sutrãtmã,  and avyãkrut are  the  three  bodies  of  that 
Virãt-Purush.  These bodies, which are encircled by the eight barriers 
(jad  prakruti),  have  been  produced  from  the  twenty-four tattvas. 
 
31.4 
“The indriyas,  antah-karans, and  their  presiding devs entered  that 
Virãt and attempted to awaken him.  Despite Virat’s jeev being inside 
his  body, Virãt still  did  not  awaken.    Only  when Vãsudev Bhagvãn – 
the kshetragna – entered  within  him  in  the svarup of Purush did  the 
body of Virãt awaken.  Only then did Virãt-Purush become capable of 
performing all his activities. 
 
31.5 
“To inspire the jeev,  that  same Bhagvãn – while  remaining  beyond 
Mãyã in  the  form  of sushupti – resides  in  the jeev as  its  witness.  
However,  the jeev has  been  associated  with  the  body,  the indriyas, 
and the vishays.  As a result of this improper association, the jeev has 
become one  with  the  body,  and  the indriyas.    After  abandoning  their 
association, the jeev realises, ‘My self is brahm, which is transcendental 
and free from mãyã.’  If  a  person  associates  with brahm through 
continuous thinking in this way, the jeev acquires the qualities of that 
brahm.  However, it is a great fault of the jeev that even after hearing 
this fact, it cannot maintain constant remembrance that it is brahm.   
 
31.6 
“In this way, the inspirer of both the ishvar (Virãt-Purush) and of this 
jeev is Purushottam – also  known  as Vãsudev – in  the svarup of 

GADHADÃ II 
- 514 - 
Purush.    Like  the jeev,  that Virãt-Purush is  also  bound  by mãyã;  and 
remains  bound  until  he  completes  his  lifespan  of  two parãrdhs.  
When he dies, he gets direct contact with that Purush.  This is because 
his  father  (Purush)  is  powerful  and  cares  for  him  appropriately.    So, 
because Virãt-Purush is attached to Mãyã, he is again produced from 
Mãyã at the end of destruction. 
 
31.7 
“Moreover, just as the jeev is  bound and  powerless,  in  the same  way 
its father is also bound and powerless.  Then, how can the father help 
the  son?   Therefore,  the jeev remains  continuously  attached  to mãyã 
in the form of sushupti.  However, that attachment is never broken.  It 
is only broken when a person constantly associates with his inspirer 
(brahm), through thinking – as previously described. 
 
31.8 
“Also, Virãt-Purush worships Sankarshan, Aniruddha, and Pradyumna.  
Specifically, during the state of destruction, he worships Sankarshan; 
during  the  state  of  sustenance,  he  worships Pradyumna;  and  during 
the  state  of  creation,  he  worships Aniruddha.    In  fact, Sankarshan, 
Aniruddha,   and Pradyumna are   the sagun svarups of Vãsudev 
Bhagvãn, and it is the strength of the upãsanã of Virãt-Purush that he 
becomes capable of performing the activities of creation, sustenance, 
and  destruction.    Moreover,  as  long  as  he  worships  these  three,  his 
association  with Mãyã – in  the  form  of  creation,  sustenance,  and 
destruction – is not broken.  It is when he worships Vãsudev Bhagvãn, 
who is nirgun, that Virãt-Purush abandons Mãyã and becomes brahm-
rup.    Similarly,  when  the jeev worships Bhagvãn in  the svarup of 
Brahma and  other devs,  it  attains  rewards  in  the  form  of dharma, 
arth, and kãm.  However, when it worships the avatãrs of Bhagvãn, it 
becomes brahm-rup and  attains kalyãn.    The  same  applies  for Virãt-
Purush. 
 
31.9
 “Now, it is said in the shãstras that the avatãrs are  formed from that 
Virãt-Purush.  This should be understood as follows:  When Vãsudev-
Nãrãyan – through the svarup of Purush – comes and resides in Virãt-

GADHADÃ II 
- 515 - 
Purush,  He  is  said  to  be  an avatãr.    Therefore,  all  those avatãrs are 
Vãsudev Bhagvãn’s only.  When the Vãsudev Bhagvãn withdraws 
Himself and separates from Virãt-Purush, then it is not possible for an 
avatãr to  be  formed  through Virãt-Purush alone.    Therefore,  the 
descriptions  of avatãrs manifesting  through  him  are  only  because of 
the   presence   of Vãsudev in   him.      In   fact,   when Vãsudev – the 
kshetragna – had not yet entered him, that Virãt-Purush was not even 
capable of performing any of his own activities. 
 
31.10 
“When Purush impregnates Mãyã, a son in the form of Virãt-Purush is 
produced   via Pradhãn-Purush.      From   that   same Mãyã,   many 
brahmãnds – in  the  form  of  many Virãt-Purush – are  produced  via 
countless Pradhãn-Purush pairs.    Furthermore,  that Purush has  no 
desires,  he  is  a mukta,  he  is brahm-rup, and  he  is  the  cause  of Mãyã.  
Although  he  stays  within Mãyã,  he  still  remains  unaffected  by Mãyã.  
Also, he has no desire to enjoy Mãyã since he is happy due to the bliss 
of brahm; therefore, he is fulfilled. 
 
31.11 
“The ishvar known as Virãt-Purush indulges in the pleasures of mãyã 
and  then,  at  the  time  of  destruction,  abandons Mãyã.   On  the  other 
hand, the jeev indulges in the pleasures of mãyã and then merges into 
Mãyã, remaining miserable.” 
 
31.12 
Shuk  Muni  then  asked,  “Purushottam Vãsudev,   in   the svarup of 
Purush,  is  the  cause of  the  creation,  sustenance,  and  destruction  of 
countless brahmãnds.    Consequently,  the shãstras generally  describe 
Purushottam as Purush.    But,  what  is  the  extent  of  the  distinction 
between Purush and Vãsudev?” 
 
31.13 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then explained, “Just as there is a difference between 
the jeev and Virãt-Purush, who is an ishvar; and just as there is also a 
difference between ishvar and Purush, similarly, there is an immense 
difference   between Purush and Vãsudev Bhagvãn.    Purushottam 
Vãsudev Bhagvãn is  the  master  of  all,  whereas  there  are  many  such 

GADHADÃ II 
- 516 - 
brahm-rup Purush who  worship  the  holy  feet  of Vãsudev and  who 
offer to praise to Him.  In this way, Purushottam, Purush, ishvar, jeev, 
and Mãyã are the five eternal entities. 
 
31.14 
“I have explained this fact in this way many times, but it is not firmly 
fixed in a person’s heart due to a lack of deep thinking.  As a result, 
after  listening  to  the  words  of  the shãstras,  no  stability  remains  in  a 
person’s understanding.  However,  if  it  has  been  absolutely  fixed, 
then his understanding would never falter on listening to such words.  
Therefore,  this  fact  should  be  thoroughly  thought  of  and  written 
down.”   
 
31.15
 In this way, the talk delivered by Shreeji Mahãrãj has been written. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 31 || 165 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 32 
Detaching From The Body 
 
32.1 
In the Samvat year 1880, on Shrãvan sud 5 [11
th
 August 1823], Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  in  His  residence  in  Dãdã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.    He  had  tied  a  black-bordered  cloth  around  His  head,  and 
garlands of flowers were hanging around His neck.  Also, bunches of 
flowers  had  been  placed  above  His  ears,  and  tassels  of  flowers  were 
placed upon His head.  A sabhã of paramhans, as well as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
32.2 
Then, addressing all of haribhaktas, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “In worldly 
life, the love a person has for family members is like that of a cactus 
plant  or  the  branch  of  a  banyan  or  pipal  tree – if  they  are  cut  and 
planted   elsewhere,   they   would   once   again   grow   into   trees.      In 
comparison, once a mango tree or a neem tree is cut, it does not take 
root again.  The love that a person has for those other than his family 

GADHADÃ II 
- 517 - 
members is like that of the mango tree or the neem tree; whereas the 
love a person has for his family members is like the cactus plant and 
banyan  tree – if  they  have  been  cut  down,  they  definitely  do  grow 
again, even while lying in the soil. 
 
32.3
 “For this reason, the love that a person has for his family is only 
uprooted when he realises his true svarup to be the jeevãtmã, distinct 
from  the  three  bodies  of sthul, sukshma and kãran;  when,  after 
discarding   all   pride   of   gender, varna and ãshram, he   beholds 
Bhagvãn’s murti within it; and when he becomes eager to engage only 
in  the  worship  of Bhagvãn.    Only  then  will  the  love  for  his  family  be 
completely cut.  Besides this, there is no other means to do so.” 
 
32.4
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj continued, “The  sole  cause  behind  the jeev 
attaining kalyãn,  overcoming mãyã,  and  becoming brahm-svarup is 
its   engagement   in   the gnãn, dhyãn, kirtans,   and kathã of   the 
pratyaksha svarup of Vãsudev Bhagvãn, who is Purushottam.  It is due 
to these that the jeev overcomes mãyã, attains an extremely elevated 
state,  and  also  attains Bhagvãn’s Akshardhãm.    In  this, ãtmã-nishthã, 
vairãgya,   and dharma are   merely   helpful   in   offering bhakti to 
Bhagvãn.  Without the bhakti of Bhagvãn, vairãgya, ãtmã-nishthã, and 
dharma alone are not capable of allowing the jeev to overcome mãyã.  
In  fact,  even  if  a  person  does  not  possess  intense dharma, ãtmã-
nishthã,  or vairãgya,  if  he  possesses  only bhakti towards Bhagvãn, 
then  he  would  still  attain kalyãn.    This  is  the  power  of bhakti over 
dharma, ãtmã-nishthã, and vairãgya. 
 
32.5 
“However, only with the help of dharma, ãtmã-nishthã, and vairãgya, 
is unobstructed bhakti possible.  Without those other characteristics, 
there  will  definitely  be  difficulties  in  offering bhakti during  times  of 
unpleasant  circumstances.    That  is  why  a  person should  offer bhakti 
coupled with dharma, ãtmã-nishthã, and vairãgya. 
 
32.6 
“Having said this, even if a bhakta who offers such bhakti happens to 
be confronted by unpleasant desh, kãl, kriyã,  and sang, then although 

GADHADÃ II 
- 518 - 
he is a bhakta of Bhagvãn, his heart would indeed become disturbed, 
and  he  would  become  unpredictable.  Therefore,  a  person  should 
abandon   unpleasant desh,   unpleasant kãl,   unpleasant kriyã, and 
unpleasant sang and  forever  associate  with  pleasant desh,  pleasant 
kãl,  pleasant kriyã, and  pleasant sang;  but  never  should  a  person 
associate with unpleasant circumstances.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 32 || 165 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 33 
The Vow Of Nishkãm 
 
33.1
 In  the Samvat year 1880,  on Shrãvan vad 13 [18
th
 September  1823], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress  with  a 
large,   cylindrical   pillow   that   had   been   placed   on   a   decorated 
bedstead  in  Dãdã  Khãchar's darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed 
entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
33.2 
Then,  addressing  all  the sãdhus and bhaktas,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said, 
“First, I shall talk about my strengths.  After that, all of you can 
describe  your  personal  thoughts  on  how  you feel kalyãn can  be 
attained, and you can also explain how you think you should behave 
in  order  for Bhagvãn to  be  pleased  with  you  in  this lok and  other 
loks.” 
 
33.3 
Having said this, Shreeji Mahãrãj began to describe His own strength, 
saying, “If it appears to me that I have a liking for something, I would 
only  be  happy  after  I  have  discarded  it.    Should  I  recall  in  my  mind 
any object or any person other than bhaktas of Bhagvãn, then I would 
feel  comfortable  only  after  I  have  totally  distanced  myself  from that 
object or person.  Also, in my heart, in no way do I ever experience a 
dislike  towards  a bhakta of Bhagvãn.    Even  though  I  am  forcefully 

GADHADÃ II 
- 519 - 
offered the panch-vishays without actually wishing for them myself, I 
still do not have any desire for them; I push them away.  In fact, I take 
oath on the lives of these paramhans that from the day I was born to 
this  very  day,  I  have  never  had  an  improper  thought  regarding 
women  or  wealth,  either  in  the jãgrat state  or  in  the svapna state.  
Therefore,  I  am  eternally flawless.    A  person  who  perceives  any 
avgun in  me  will  himself  suffer  from  vicious  thoughts  both  in  the 
jãgrat and svapna state.    Moreover,  he  will  suffer greatly  at  the  time 
of his death as well. 
 
33.4 
“In addition, only the thought of Bhagvãn remains  within  my  heart, 
and   although   I   outwardly   meet   and   associate   with bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn,  it  is  solely  for  the  benefit  of  their jeevs.    Indeed,  the  day 
when  I  feel  that  I  have  developed  love  for  something  other  than  the 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn,  I  will  consider  myself  as  having  been  displaced 
from  my  spiritual  status.    However,  I  am  confident  that  that  would 
never happen.  Therefore, I have described my strength to you.  Now, 
all of you can describe your own personal strengths.” 
 
33.5 
Hearing   this,   all   the sãdhus and bhaktas each   described   their 
strengths,  which  were  their  beliefs  as  to  how Bhagvãn would  be 
pleased  upon  them  if  they  were  to  abide  by  that  strength  in  this lok 
and  other loks.    Of  them, some  described  how  they  possess vairãgya 
of  everything  except Bhagvãn;  others  mentioned  their  quality  of 
ãtmã-nishthã;   some   spoke   of   their   love   for Bhagvãn;   and   some 
mentioned  their  observance  of dharma.    In  this  way,  many  different 
strengths were mentioned.  However, no one mentioned the strength 
that Shreeji Mahãrãj had in mind. 
 
33.6 
So, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “If a person firmly observes the vow of 
nishkãm, then he is never far from Bhagvãn – whether he is in this lok 
or other loks.  Moreover, my love for such a person never diminishes.  
In  fact,  the  very  reason that  I  have  stayed  here  is  because  of  the 
determination  of  the bhaktas to  observe  the  vow  of nishkãm.    If  a 
person  strictly  observes  that  vow,  then  even  if  I  were  a  thousand 

GADHADÃ II 
- 520 - 
miles  away  from  him,  I  would  still  be  close  to  him.    Conversely,  if  a 
person is slack in his observance of the vow of nishkãm, then even if 
he  is  beside  me,  he  is  as  good  as  a  hundred  thousand  miles  away.  
Also, I only like the service offered by a bhakta who is nishkãmi.  It is 
only   because   this   Mulji   Brahm-Chãri   is   extremely   strict   in   his 
observance  of  the  vow  of nishkãm that  I  like  his sevã very  much.  
However, if someone else does sevã, I am not as pleased. 
 
33.7 
“Furthermore, in all the talks that I deliver, I always strongly promote 
the observance of the vow of nishkãm.  I have been firmly reinforcing 
this since the day I was born. 
 
33.8
 “When a sabhã has  gathered,  if  a  man  or  woman  looks  at  someone 
else with kãm, then no matter how hard they may try to conceal it, it 
never   escapes   my   attention.      At   that   time,   I   become   extremely 
displeased upon that person, and even my face turns red.  It hurts me 
deeply, but feeling obliged, I cannot say much.  Furthermore, being a 
sãdhu,  I  keep  my  feelings  within  my  heart.    However,  if  I  were  to 
adopt the ways of a king, I would punish that person severely. 
 
33.9 
“That is why I have already instructed all the senior paramhans and 
senior women that if any male or female bhakta in satsang commits a 
breach in his or her observance of the vow of nishkãm, then please do 
not  inform  me  of  it.    This  is  because  I  am  deeply  saddened  when  I 
hear  such  things – just  as  a  childless  couple  would  feel  saddened  if 
their  newly  born  son  were  to  suddenly  die.    In  fact,  at  such  times,  I 
feel  like  abandoning  this satsang and  leaving.    Therefore,  only  those 
who  observe this  vow  of nishkãm are  dear  to  me;  they  and  I  will 
always be very close, both in his lok and other loks.” 
 
33.10 
Then,  Harji  Thakkar  asked,  “By  what  means  can  a  person’s 
observance of the vow of nishkãm become extremely firm?” 
 
33.11 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “There is a way, and it comprises of three 
components.    Just  as  many  components  make  up  a  bull-cart – the 
driver,   the   pair   of   bulls,   the   wheels,   the   yoke,   the   supporting 

GADHADÃ II 
- 521 - 
assembly,  and  the  wooden  frame – similarly,  many  components  are 
required  to  be  able  to  firmly  observe  the  vow  of nishkãm.    Of  these, 
there are three that are absolutely fundamental. 
 
33.12 
“The first is to conquer the mind by constantly thinking, ‘I am the 
ãtmã, not the body’.    Also,  the  mind  should  be  continuously kept 
engaged in the nine types of bhakti.  It should not be left unoccupied 
for even a moment.  For example, if a man conquers a ghost, but does 
not  assign  it  some  work  to  do,  the  ghost  would  turn  onto  the  man 
himself.    In  this  sense,  the  mind  is  just  like a  ghost;  when  it  is  not 
engaged  in  the bhakti of Bhagvãn,  it  begins  to  think  of  evil  thoughts.  
This can  be  compared  to the  ghost  getting  ready  to  devour  the  man.  
For  this  reason,  the  mind  should  continuously  be  kept  occupied  in 
kathãs and kirtans related to Bhagvãn.  This can be known as having 
conquered the mind. 
 
33.13
 “The second component is to keep the prãns under  control.   Shree 
Krishna Bhagvãn has  said  in  the  Bhagvad  Geetã, ‘A person’s diet and 
activity should be kept regulated; he should not keep a strong yearning 
for food’.    A  person  who  behaves  in  this  way  is  said  to  have  kept  his 
prãns under  control.    If  this  is  not  done,  he  will  feel  an  intense 
yearning  for  food  in  his  mind.    Consequently,  his  tongue  will  crave 
after the countless types of tastes.  As a result, any other indriyas that 
he  may  have  conquered  will  also  become  free.    Therefore,  a  person 
should control his prãns by controlling his diet. 
 
33.14 
“The  third component requires a  person to  control  his  body  by 
physically keeping it within the niyams prescribed in satsang for each 
individual.  
 
33.15 
“So, by strictly observing these three components in this way, a 
person’s observance of the vow of nishkãm becomes  extremely  firm.  
However,  a  person  should  not  consider  this  to  be  very  difficult  to 
practice; it is not at all difficult for someone who is, after all, a sãdhu.  
The enemies, such as kãm, krodh, and lobh prevail strongly even in a 

GADHADÃ II 
- 522 - 
sãdhu, but to please Bhagvãn, he would still abandon them; only then 
can he be called a true sãdhu. 
 
33.16 
“After all, what is impossible to achieve with this human body?  That 
which is practiced regularly can definitely be achieved.  For example, 
due to the daily drawing of water from a well, the constant rubbing of 
even a soft rope can cause a groove in the very hard piece of rock that 
lies  on  the  edge  of  that  well.    Similarly,  for  a  person  who  is  a sãdhu 
and   who   continuously  persists   in   his   efforts   for   eradicating   his 
svabhãvs, how long can those svabhãvs remain?  They most certainly 
will  be  destroyed.    Therefore,  a  person  who  wishes  to  observe  the 
vow  of nishkãm should intensely  employ  the method  that  comprises 
of the three components I have just described.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 33 || 166 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 34 
Are The Tattvas Jad Or Chaitanya? 
 
34.1 
In  the Samvat year  1880,  on Bhãdarvã sud 1  [5
th
 September  1823], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   the   veranda 
outside  the  east-facing  rooms  of  Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.  
He was wearing a white dhoti and had covered Himself with a white 
chãdar.  He had also tied a black-bordered cloth around His head.  A 
sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had 
gathered before Him.  Some of the paramhans were singing kirtans to 
the accompaniment of a dukad and sarodã.
 
 
34.2 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Please stop the kirtans, and let us conduct 
a question-answer discussion in order to dispel drowsiness.” 
 
34.3 
Having said that, Shreeji Mahãrãj continued, “First of all, allow me to 
ask  a  question:    The  twenty-four tattvas,  such  as  the indriyas  and 
antah-karans which  are  the  result  of Mãyã,  reside  in  the jeev.    Now, 
are those elements jad, or are they chaitanya?” 

GADHADÃ II 
- 523 - 
 
34.4 
The paramhans replied, “Those tattvas are definitely chaitanya.” 
 
34.5 
Hearing the reply, Shreeji Mahãrãj contradicted, “If those elements 
are chaitanya,  then  along  with  the jeev residing  in  this  body,  there 
should  be  twenty-four jeevs for  the  twenty-four tattvas.    Therefore, 
when  the jeev attains kalyãn,  it  would  be  distributed  among  all  of 
them.    Moreover,  all  sins  that  are  committed  by  the jeev would  also 
be distributed among all of them.  Therefore, that which experiences 
pleasure  and  pain  cannot  be  said  to  be  just  one jeev.    Furthermore, 
the  three  types  of karmas – sanchit karmas, prãrabdha karmas,  and 
kriyamãn karmas – cannot   be   said   to   apply   to   just   one jeev.  
Furthermore, in the past, when Nãrad and the others attained kalyãn, 
only  their  own jeev attained kalyãn,  but  there  is  no  mention  of  the 
jeevs of the twenty-four tattvas attaining kalyãn as well.” 
 
34.6 
By using such logic, Shreeji Mahãrãj proved the tattvas to be without 
a jeev.      He   then   logically   disproved   each   answer   given   by   the 
paramhans.  As  a  result,  the paramhans were  unable  to  answer  the 
question in any way at all. 
 
34.7 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Allow me to answer the question.  Due to 
the indifference between an effect and its cause, there are two types 
of tattvas.  The tattvas that are in the form of cause are chaitanya, and 
the tattvas that are in the form of the effect are jad.  In actuality, the 
jeev resides  in  the  heart;  but  through  its  power  of  consciousness,  it 
behaves  with  oneness  with  the  body,  the indriyas,  and  the antah-
karans.   As  a  result,  the  body,  the indriyas,  and  the  antah-karans 
appear to be chaitanya; but, in reality, they are jad. 
 
34.8 
“When that jeev becomes  a bhakta of Bhagvãn and  attains  the  dhãm 
of Bhagvãn,  the tattvas that  are jad are  left  behind.    Now,  as  those 
twenty-four tattvas are produced from Mãyã, they are forms of Mãyã 
and  are jad;  they  appear  differently  in  the  form  of  the  body,  the 
indriyas, and the antah-karans.  For example, there is one pruthvi that 
assumes   the   five   forms   of   the   skin,   flesh,   marrow,   bones,   and 

GADHADÃ II 
- 524 - 
muscles.    Due  to  the  skill  of  the  maker,  it  also  comes  in  the  form  of 
glass.    In  the  same  way,  that Mãyã,  due  to  the  will  of Bhagvãn, 
appears  in  different  forms  (the  body,  the indriyas,  and  the antah-
karans).” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 34 || 167 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 35 
Upãsanã Is Required To Attain Kalyãn 
 
35.1 
In  the Samvat year  1880,  two-and-a-half  hours  before  sunrise  on 
Bhãdarvã sud 11 [16
th
 September 1823], Shreeji Mahãrãj awoke from 
sleep and sat on a decorated bedstead that had been placed over the 
underground store of grains in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.  
He  was  wearing  a  white khes and  had  covered  Himself  with  a white 
pachhedi.  He had also tied a black-bordered cloth around His head. 
 
35.2
 At  that  time,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  summoned  all  the paramhans and 
bhaktas.  Then, addressing them, He began, “I slept very soundly last 
night, and though I tried very hard to awake, I could not.  During that 
sleep,  I  thought  a  great  deal.    I  have  made  a  decision  based  upon 
these thoughts, which I shall now tell you.” 
 
35.3
 He then said, “Even before I met Rãmãnand Swãmi, I could see my 
ãtmã as if it were before my eyes, and I also see it now.  That ãtmã is 
luminous with light like that of the sun.  Even amidst the activities of 
all  my indriyas,  I  do  not  lose  awareness  of  that ãtmã for  even  a 
moment. 
 
35.4 
“In actual fact, such ãtmã-nishthã is  very  difficult  to  attain.    Only  a 
fortunate person who has sanskãrs of many past lives is able to attain 
such ãtmã-nishthã,  whereas  if  someone  else  were  to  think  about  the 
ãtmã for  even  a  hundred  years,  he  would  still  not  attain ãtmã-
nishthã. 
 

GADHADÃ II 
- 525 - 
35.5 
“So, how can a person attain ãtmã-nishthã?    Well,  when  a  person 
performs dhyãn upon the murti of Shree Krishna Bhagvãn, it is not at 
all difficult to attain kalyãn.  Conversely, no one should even hope of 
understanding   or   seeing   the ãtmã by   merely   thinking   about   it 
without  performing dhyãn upon Bhagvãn.    However,  by  the upãsanã 
of Bhagvãn,  narrating  His charitras,  chanting  His  holy  name,  and 
following dharma, it is not at all difficult for the jeev to attain kalyãn; 
it  is  an  easy  path – like  crossing  the  ocean  by  sitting  in  a  boat.    In 
contrast,  to  attain kalyãn through ãtmã-nishthã is  a  difficult  path – 
like tying gourds to the body and trying to cross the ocean. 
 
35.6 
“The only reason why I deliver such talks about knowledge of the 
ãtmã is  that  if  a  person  can  realise  his ãtmã to  be  distinct  from the 
body,  then  he  will  no  longer  have  any  love  for  his  body  or  for  his 
relatives.  Then, there would no longer be any obstacles in the bhakti 
of Bhagvãn.    This  is  the  only  reason;  but  a  person  should  not  think 
that  it  is  possible  to  attain kalyãn by  the  knowledge  of  the ãtmã 
alone. 
 
35.7 
“Also, there are sayings in the world such as, ‘If the mind is pure, then 
a  vessel  of  water  is  as  good  as  Gangã-water’.  So,  if  the  mind  is  pure, 
there  is  no  need  to  bathe  in  the  Gangã  to  become  pure.    However, 
these  words are  not  true.    Regardless  of  how  much  a  person  may 
have mastered samãdhi, or how thoughtful he may be, if he begins to 
stay  in  the  close  company  of  women,  there  is  no  way  in  which  he 
could  maintain  his dharma.    Similarly,  regardless  of  how  strict  a 
woman may   be   in   observing dharma,   if   she   stays   in   the   close 
company  of  men,  then  she  would  also in  no  way  be  able  to maintain 
her dharma.    Therefore,  no  one  should  believe  that  men  and  women 
can stay in each other’s company and still be able to maintain their 
dharma.  This fact is true, and no one should doubt it. 
 
35.8 
“When can a person maintain his dharma?    Only  if  those  who  are 
paramhans and brahm-chãris abide  by  the niyams prescribed  for 

GADHADÃ II 
- 526 - 
them,  such  as brahm-chãrya, will  they  be  able  to  maintain  their 
dharma.    The  same  is  true  for  women;  only  if  they  abide  by  the 
niyams prescribed  for   them   will   they   be   able  to   maintain   their 
dharma as  well.    In  the  same  way,  if  all  other satsangi  grahasthas 
abide by the niyams prescribed for them – including not staying in an 
isolated  place  with  even  his  young  mother,  sister,  or  daughter;  and 
not extensively looking at them either – then they will also be able to 
maintain their dharma. 
 
35.9 
“In this way, following dharma, upãsanã of the svarup of Bhagvãn, 
listening to and narrating the charitras of Bhagvãn’s avatãrs, and 
chanting His holy name, are the four qualities that are fundamentally 
necessary for the jeev’s kalyãn. 
 
35.10 
“Indeed, all of you realise me to be Bhagvãn.    So,  wherever  I  have 
organised  festivals;  wherever  all  the paramhans and brahm-chãris, 
male  and  female satsangi bhaktas have  gathered;  when  I  have  had 
kirtans sung;  when  I  have  delivered  talks;  and  when  my pujã had 
been  performed,  all  such leelãs and charitras should  be  narrated, 
heard,  and  thought  about  in the  mind.    If  a  person remembers  these 
during  his  last  moments,  his jeev will  certainly  attain  the dhãm of 
Bhagvãn.    In  this  way,  all  of  my leelãs and charitras,  as  well  as  the 
chanting  of  my  name,  are kalyãn-kãri.    When  I  explained  this  to 
Svarupãnand Swãmi, the agonising pain in his body due to illness was 
completely relieved, and he felt profound peace.  In fact, he could see 
his own ãtmã very well, yet it was of no use. 
 
35.11 
“A  person should  also  narrate  the  listen  to  the charitras of  the 
previous avatãrs of Bhagvãn,  such  as Rãm and Krishna,  wherever 
those charitras may have taken place. 
 
35.12 
“It is for the purpose of consolidating those four qualities in you that I 
described   the   importance   of   the   eight shãstras,   like   Shreemad 
Bhãgvat.    Therefore,  the shãstras should  be  read  and  studied;  and 
only those four qualities should be emphasised. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 527 - 
35.13 
“Also, understand that to try to attain kalyãn by  only  observing 
dharma without  the  other  three  qualities – upãsanã of Bhagvãn’s 
murti,  narrating  and  listening  to Bhagvãn’s charitras,  and  chanting 
His  holy  name – would  be  as  difficult  as  trying  to  cross  the  ocean 
after tying gourds to the body.  Yet, though a person has refuge of the 
murti of Bhagvãn;  though  he  narrates  and listens Bhagvãn’s leelãs 
and charitras; and though he chants the name of Bhagvãn, if he does 
not observe dharma, he should be known to be as foolish as a person 
who  tries  to  cross  the ocean  carrying  a  stone slab  upon  his  head;  he 
should also be known to be like an outcast. 
 
35.14 
“Therefore, a jeev can  attain kalyãn only  by  those  four  qualities.  
Without them, there are no other means by which a person can attain 
kalyãn.  However, a person should only listen to and sing the kirtans 
and  poems  written  by  Muktãnand  Swãmi  and  other sãdhus.   Kirtans 
and  poems  composed  by  other  poets  can  also  be  heard  and  sung  if 
they  describe  the leelãs and charitras of Bhagvãn.    However,  poems 
and kirtans like  those  composed  by  the  likes  of  Kabir  and  Ãkhã 
should not be sung or heard.” 
 
35.15 
Concluding, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “All of you have faith in me.  If I 
were  to  mislead  you  with  unfounded  talks,  it  would  amount  to 
throwing all of you into a well and sealing it with a stone slab so that 
there would be no hope of escape.  However, if you are misled along 
the  wrong  path  because  of  your  faith  in  my  words,  then  what  good 
would that be to me?  Therefore, these talks are for the sake of your 
kalyãn.  I have told you this out of love for all of you, so now all of you 
should understand it and strictly live by it.” 
 
35.16 
Having said this, Shreeji Mahãrãj finally added, “Now, if you have 
decided to act according to the talk which I have just delivered, then 
come forward one by one and touch my feet.  While doing so, take an 
oath and pledge, ‘I definitely want to behave accordingly’.” 
 
35.17 
Then,  all  the paramhans and satsangis happily  got  up  and  touched 
Shreeji Mahãrãj’s holy feet and bowed before Him.  He then told the 

GADHADÃ II 
- 528 - 
ladies  to  do  the  same.    So,  standing  at  a  distance,  the  ladies  also 
pledged and took an oath to behave accordingly.  Shreeji Mahãrãj was 
very pleased with this.  Then, He retired to His residence. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 35 || 168 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 36 
Maintaining Continuous Vrutti 
 
36.1 
In  the Samvat year  1880,  on Bhãdarvã sud  Punam [30
th
 September 
1823], Swãmi Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  west-facing  rooms  of  Dãdã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various 
places, had gathered before Him. 
 
36.2 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Please conduct a question-answer 
discussion.” 
 
36.3 
Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked a question:  “By what means can a 
person continuously engage his vrutti on Bhagvãn?” 
 
36.4 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Actually, there are four methods to achieve 
this.    Of  these,  the  first  method  is  that  the chitt has  a  tendency  of 
becoming  engrossed;  so  it  can  become  engrossed  in  everything.    So, 
just  as  it  becomes engrossed in a person’s son or wife, it can also 
become engrossed in Bhagvãn.  Therefore, that is one method. 
 
36.5 
“The second method is to be extremely brave.  When a person with 
such  bravery  in  his  heart  conceives  some  desirous  thought  other 
than that of Bhagvãn, as he is a brave bhakta, intense thinking arises 
within    which    dispel    all    desirous    thoughts.        Therefore,    he 
continuously engages his vrutti on the svarup of Bhagvãn. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 529 - 
36.6 
“The third method is fear.  If extreme fear of birth, death, Narak, and 
the  cycle  of  births  and  deaths  exists  in  a  person’s  heart,  he 
continuously engages his vrutti on the svarup of Bhagvãn due to fear. 
 
36.7 
“The fourth method is vairãgya.   A  person  with vairãgya – through 
gnãn of  the  Sãnkhya shãstras – realises  his  own ãtmã to  be  distinct 
from  the  body;  and  except  for  that ãtmã,  he  realises  all  worldly 
objects  to  be asatya.    Following  this,  he  beholds Paramãtmã within 
his ãtmã and continuously thinks about Him.
 
 
36.8 
“With the exception of a person on whom Bhagvãn bestows His grace 
– regarding   which   nothing   can   be   said – people   may   attempt 
countless  other means,  but  without  resorting  to  these four  methods, 
a   person   will   not   be   able   to   continuously   engage   his vrutti on 
Bhagvãn.    Of  course,  continuously  engaging  the vrutti on Bhagvãn is 
an  extremely  difficult  achievement.    It  is  only  possible  by  those 
whose  good  deeds  from  many  lives  have  ripened.    For  others,  it  is 
very difficult, indeed.” 
 
36.9 
Having described how to continuously engage the vrutti on Bhagvãn’s 
svarup, Shreeji Mahãrãj added, “In this world, everyone talks of mãyã.  
I  have  seen  the  characteristics  of  that mãyã as  follows:    Love  for 
anything other than Bhagvãn is itself mãyã.  In fact, the love a person 
has  towards  his  own  body  and  his  relatives  and  towards  the  person 
who  provides  for  his  body,  exceeds  even  the  extreme  love  a  person 
has  for  the panch-vishays.    Therefore,  a  person  who  has  eradicated 
love for his body, his relations, and those who provide for his body is 
said  to  have  risen  above Bhagvãn’s mãyã.    In  fact,  a  person  who 
eradicates   love   for   everyone   other   than Bhagvãn develops   love 
towards Bhagvãn.    Then,  when  love  for Bhagvãn is  developed,  his 
vrutti continuously  remains  on Bhagvãn.    When  that  is  achieved,  he 
has nothing further to achieve; he has become fulfilled.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 36 || 169 || 

GADHADÃ II 
- 530 - 
Gadhadã II – 37 
Eradicating A Svabhãv 
 
37.1 
In  the Samvat year  1880,  on Bhãdarvã vad 1  [21
st
 September  1823], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   the   veranda 
outside the west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  
He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    At  that  time,  a sabhã of 
paramhans, as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered 
before Him. 
 
37.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “In the Geetã, it is said that even a 
person  possessing gnãn behaves  according  to  his svabhãvs,  and  not 
even the strength of self-control mentioned in the shãstras is effective 
in such cases.  Then, how can such svabhãvs be eradicated?” 
 
37.3 
All  the munis thought  over  the  question,  but  they  were  unable  to 
answer it. 
 
37.4 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “The answer to that is as follows:  When a 
sat-purush gives  guidance  on  how  to  eradicate  such svabhãvs,  if  a 
person has total faith in those words; if he has deep love for the sat-
purush giving  the  guidance;  and  if  he  accepts  those  words  to  be  for 
his  own  benefit  no  matter  how  painfully  strong  these  sat-purush’s 
words  seem,  then  his svabhãvs will  be  eradicated.    Except  for  this, 
there   is   no   other   method.      Therefore,   regardless   of   how   much 
Bhagvãn or the sat-purush insults him for the purpose of eradicating 
his svabhãvs,  and  regardless  of  the  harsh  words  they  may  utter,  a 
person  who  wishes  to  eradicate  his svabhãvs should  not  feel  hurt  in 
any way and should consider only the qualities of the person advising 
him.    If  a  person  behaves  in  this  way,  then  that svabhãv,  which 
otherwise could not be eradicated in any way, is eradicated.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 37 || 170 || 
 

GADHADÃ II 
- 531 - 
Gadhadã II – 38 
Mãnchã Bhakta And The Alchemist 
 
38.1 
In  the Samvat year  1880,  on Bhãdarvã vad 6  [26
th
 September  1823], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress  with  a 
large,   cylindrical   pillow   that   had   been   placed   on   a   decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  east-facing  rooms  of  Dãdã 
Khãchar's darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.    At  that  time,  a sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
38.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “If a worldly person were to come across 
someone who could grant him wealth or a son, he would immediately 
develop  faith  in  that  person.    However,  a bhakta of Bhagvãn never 
has  faith  in  charms  and  spells,  in  witchcraft  or  in  vulgar,  dramatic 
performances.      If   he   were   to   have   faith   in   charms,   spells,   or 
witchcraft,  then  even  though  he  may  be  a satsangi,  he  should  be 
considered to be half vimukh. 
 
38.3
 “Having  said  this,  there  are  not  many  true bhaktas of Bhagvãn.  
Nonetheless, Mãnchã Bhakta of Kãriyãni was indeed a true bhakta of 
Bhagvãn.    Prior  to  joining  the satsang,  he  was  in  the  Mãrgi  sect.  
However,  in  no  way  did  he  lapse  in  his  observance  of  the  vow  of 
nishkãm; instead, he remained a brahm-chãrya from his childhood. 
 
38.4 
“Once, an alchemist was staying at his house.  After demonstrating 
how he could transform copper into sliver, the alchemist told Mãnchã 
Bhakta, ‘Because you are very charitable, I shall teach you  this  spell 
and show you how to transform copper into sliver’.  However, Mãnchã 
Bhakta threatened him with a stick and drove him out of the village, 
telling    him, ‘I  have  no  desire  for  anything  except  Bhagvãn’.  
Afterwards,   when   Mãnchã   Bhakta   joined satsang,   he   became   an 
ekãntik bhakta of Bhagvãn.” 
 
38.5 
Continuing, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “An ekãntik  bhakta would  firstly 
possess ãtmã-nishthã;  secondly,  he  would  possess vairãgya; thirdly, 

GADHADÃ II 
- 532 - 
he  would  be  strict  in  following dharma;  and  fourthly,  he  would 
possess  profound bhakti for Shree Krishna Bhagvãn.    When  such  an 
ekãntik  bhakta abandons his physical body, he ‘merges’ into Shree 
Krishna Bhagvãn,  whereas  a  person  who  is  not ekãntik ‘merges’ into 
Brahmã and   the   other devs or   into Sankarshan, Aniruddha,   or 
Pradyumna.    However,  without  attaining  the ekãntik state,  a  person 
cannot ‘merge’ into Shree Krishna Bhagvãn. 
 
38.6 
“Such ‘merging’ should be understood as follows:  A person who is 
very greedy is said to ‘merge’ into money; a person  who  is  very 
lustful is said to ‘merge’ into the woman he is fond of; and when a 
person  who  is  very  rich  but  childless  receives  a  son,  he  is  said  to 
‘merge’ into his son.  In this way, a person should be known as having 
‘merged’ into whatever he is attached to.  However, this ‘merging’ is 
not  like  that  of  water  merging  with  water  or  like  fire  merging  with 
fire. 
 
38.7 
“If a bhakta has ‘merged’ into his ishta-dev,  he  would  never  develop 
love   for   anything   else   except   his ishta-dev.      In   fact,   he   would 
continuously think of Him.  If he were forced to live without his ishta-
dev, he would live life in days of deep misery; but, in no way would he 
be happy.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 38 || 171 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 39 
Behaving According To Natural Qualities 
 
39.1 
In the Samvat year 1880, on Bhãdarvã vad 10 [29
th
 September 1823], 
Shreeji Mahãrãj arrived  at  Lakshmi-Vãdi  on  horseback  from  Dada 
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  There, He sat on a decorated bedstead 
that  had  been  placed  on  the  platform.    He was  dressed  entirely  in 
white  clothes.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 533 - 
39.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Please reveal to me the qualities which 
are  natural  to  you – qualities which  do  not  decrease  even  under  the 
influence of unpleasant desh, kãl, kriyã, and sang.” 
 
39.3 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then began Himself, “Here, let me first tell you the 
qualities that are natural to me.”  He then said, “Firstly, it is my 
nature  that  regardless  of  how  much  physical  contact  of  the panch-
vishays I  encounter,  I  do  not  have  any  desire  for  them  in  my  mind – 
not even in my dreams. 
 
39.4 
“Secondly, regardless of how much pravrutti I  may  be  physically 
involved  in,  when  I  look  within  towards  my ãtmã,  all  my vruttis 
withdraw into  my ãtmã – just  like  a  tortoise  withdraws  its  limbs – 
and I experience profound bliss. 
 
39.5 
“Thirdly, I have a very strong belief that Bhagvãn possesses a svarup.  
I  believe  that Shree  Krishna  Vãsudev resides  in  His Akshardhãm – 
which  is  full  of chaitanya and  full  of  divine  light – and  possesses  an 
eternal  and  definite svarup.   Bhagvãn is  also  the  all-doer,  since  that 
which  is nirãkãr can  accomplish  nothing.    In  fact,  my  belief  that 
Bhagvãn possesses  a svarup is  so  firm  that  even  though  I  have  read 
and heard many Vedãnt shãstras, my belief has not been changed. 
 
39.6 
“Fourthly,  if  I  come  to  know  of  any  man  or  woman  that  is 
pretentiously offering bhakti to Bhagvãn merely as an outward show, 
and that person is not a genuine bhakta of Bhagvãn, then my mind is 
not pleased upon seeing such a person.  Also, I never feel comfortable 
with that person, because my mind only becomes pleased when I see 
a  genuine bhakta of Bhagvãn,  and  I  am  only  comfortable  with  such 
people. 
 
39.7 
“I have described to you these four qualities that are natural to me.  
Now, all of you may tell me yours.” 
 
39.8 
Then, the senior paramhans and bhaktas described the qualities they 
possessed.   

GADHADÃ II 
- 534 - 
39.9 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “For those who are senior amongst you, 
the observance of the vow of nishkãm is an absolute must.  It may be 
fine if a person has a deficiency in some other aspect, but firmness in 
nishkãm is  absolutely  essential,  as  the  example  set  by  the  seniors  is 
what is followed by everyone else.” 
 
39.10 
After delivering this talk, Shreeji Mahãrãj returned to Dãdã Khãchar’s 
darbãr,  performed  the ãrti,  and  joined  in  the ‘Nãrãyan’ dhun and 
prayers.  Then, a sabhã of all the sãdhus and bhaktas was held there. 
 
39.11
 At  that  time,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  the  senior paramhans, “I have 
greatly explained the importance of the fifth and tenth skandhs of the 
Shreemad  Bhãgvat.    Now,  I  would  like  all  of  you  to  explain  the 
fundamental  principle  of  those  two skandhs as  you  have  come  to 
understand it.” 
 
39.12 
All the senior paramhans offered explanations according to their own 
understanding. 
 
39.13 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “Here,  allow  me  to  tell  you  the 
fundamental principle of those two skandhs.  But first of all, what can 
be   called   a   fundamental   principle?      Well,   when   a   fundamental 
principle  is  explained  to  even  the  most  learned  scholars,  scriptural 
readers, or highly intelligent people, they would have to agree with it.  
In  no  way  could  they  doubt, ‘This might not be so’.  That  is  what  can 
be called a fundamental principle. 
 
39.14 
“Now, the fundamental principle of the tenth skandh is as follows: He 
whom the Upanishads (Vedãnt) and the Shrutis and Smrutis describe 
as  being brahm,  luminous,  the  embodiment  of gnãn,  the  essence, 
subtle; and who is described as niranjan, kshetragna, the cause of all, 
Parbrahm, Purushottam, Vãsudev, Vishnu, Nãrãyan,  and nirgun – is 
this pratyaksha  svarup of Shree  Krishna Vãsudev,  the  son  of Vasudev.  
Therefore, wherever there are passages containing shloks in the tenth 
skandh,  the  words  of  those shloks refer  to  this pratyaksha  svarup of 
Shree Krishna Bhagvãn; there is no mention of anyone more superior 

GADHADÃ II 
- 535 - 
to Shree Krishna Bhagvãn.  The tenth skandh also mentions that only 
Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn is  the  cause  of  the  creation,  sustenance  and 
destruction of the whole universe. 
 
39.15 
“The greatness of Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn is  narrated  in  the  fifth 
skandh.    Also  mentioned  are  the  many  different svarups assumed  by 
Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn in  various khands for  the  sustenance  of  the 
world  and  for  the  sake  of  bestowing  bliss  upon  his bhaktas.    In 
addition,  all  those  who  abide  by  the niyams prescribed  by Shree 
Krishna  Bhagvãn attain  a  great  status,  whereas  those  who  do  not 
abide by those niyams fall from their status, even if they are great.  It 
is  also  said  that  if  a  common  person  disobeys  those niyams,  he  will 
certainly fall back. 
 
39.16 
“That  same Shree   Krishna   Vãsudev,   who   as   a   child   gave   the 
spectacular darshan of the pratyaksha four-armed svarup to Vasudev 
and Devki, is in fact the svarup of the eternal Vãsudev. 
 
39.17 
“Furthermore, that Shree Krishna Bhagvãn had behaved according to 
dharma, arth,  and kãm.  All  those  who  narrate  or  even  listen  to  the 
charitras of Bhagvãn in  which  He  followed dharma, arth,  and kãm, 
will  be  released  from  all  of  their  sins  and  will  attain Akshardhãm.  
Also,  the  birth,  actions,  and murti of  that Vãsudev  Bhagvãn are  all 
divya.  In fact, and Vãsudev Bhagvãn alone is sarvopari. 
 
39.18 
“This is the fundamental principle of  those  two skandhs.    Even  those 
who   have   attained   the brahm-rup state,   like   Shukji,   must   also 
worship   and   offer bhakti to Shree   Krishna   Bhagvãn.      Also,   as 
mentioned in the tenth skandh, even those like Shukji should narrate 
and listen to the charitras of Bhagvãn.  In fact, Shukji himself has said, 
 
parinishthitopi nairgunya uttam-shloka-leelayã 
gruheeta-chetã rãjarshe ãkhyãnam yad-adheetavãn 
O King (Parikshit)!  Despite being perfectly poised in the nirgun state, having 
been attracted by the leelãs of Bhagvãn, I (Shukdevji) studied the Shreemad 
Bhãgvat. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 536 - 
39.19 
“A person should also keep a firm belief regarding the svarup of that 
Vãsudev Bhagvãn.    If  a  person  has  a  firm  belief  of  the svarup of 
Bhagvãn, and if he happens to commit some sin, then he will be freed 
of   that   sin – because   there   is   always   some   form   of prãyshchit 
prescribed  for  committing  a  sin.    However,  to  realise Bhagvãn as 
nirãkãr is  a  sin  much  greater  than  even  the  five  great  sins.    There is 
no prãyshchit for that sin. 
 
39.20 
“Conversely, if a person realises Bhagvãn to possess a sãkãr and has a 
firm  belief  of  this,  then  even  if  he  happens  to  commit  a  sin,  there  is 
nothing to worry about.  By the grace of Bhagvãn, all of those sins will 
be burnt and his jeev will attain Bhagvãn. 
 
39.21 
“Therefore,  a  person should  keep a  firm  belief  of  the svarup of 
Bhagvãn and  firmly  worship  Him.    This  is  my  message  to  you.    So, 
please remember these words firmly in your lives.” 
 
39.22 
Having given this advice to everyone, Shreeji Mahãrãj departed to 
have His meal. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 39 || 172 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 40 
Offering One Extra Dandvat 
 
40.1 
In  the Samvat year  1880,  on Ãso vad 3  [22
nd
 October,  1823],  Shreeji 
Mahãrãj was  in  His  residence in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.  
After  bathing,  he  put  on  white  clothes,  and  sat  upon  His  seat.    Then, 
after completing His daily routine of performing pujã of Bhagvãn, He 
was  performing dandvats in  the  northern  direction  to Shree  Krishna 
Bhagvãn.  It so happened that on that day, He performed one dandvat 
more than usual.   
 
40.2 
Noticing this, Shuk Muni asked, “Mahãrãj, why did you perform one 
extra dandvat today?” 

GADHADÃ II 
- 537 - 
40.3 
Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “Everyday, after bowing to Shree Krishna 
Bhagvãn, I  used  to  pray, ‘Mahãrãj, if any feelings of ‘I-ness’ and ‘my-
ness’ for this body and its relations exist, then please eradicate them’.  
However,  today  the  following  thought  occurred  to  me:   ‘No other sin 
causes more misery to a person than when he somehow – knowingly or 
unknowingly – harms a bhakta of Bhagvãn by thought, word, or deed’.  
Therefore, I performed one extra dandvat to make up for any mistake 
that may have occurred of knowingly or unknowingly harming some 
bhakta of Bhagvãn by thought, word, or deed. 
 
40.4 
“I have come to the conclusion that the extent of damage and misery 
incurred  as  a  result  of  harming  a bhakta of Bhagvãn is  not  incurred 
by any other sin.  On the other hand, there is no spiritual activity that 
benefits  a  person  and  gives  as  much  happiness  as  that  of  serving  a 
bhakta of Bhagvãn by thought, word, and deed. 
 
40.5 
“It is because of the influence of lobh, mãn, irshyã,  and krodh that  a 
person  harms  a bhakta of Bhagvãn.    Only  a  person  who  does  not 
possess  these  four  inner  enemies  can  respect  a bhakta of Bhagvãn.  
Therefore, a person who wishes to experience supreme happiness in 
this  very  body  and  also  experience  supreme  happiness  after  death 
should never harm a bhakta of Bhagvãn by thought, word, or deed. 
 
40.6 
“However, if a person does somehow harm a bhakta of Bhagvãn, then 
he  should  verbally  pray  to  him  for  forgiveness;  and  physically  and 
mentally,  he  should  perform dandvats before  him  and  determine  to 
never harm him again.  However, he should not behave in such a way 
that he performs dandvats after harming someone once, only to then 
harm him again and perform dandvats again. 
 
40.7 
“So that you remember this fact daily, from today, all sãdhus and  all 
bhaktas should observe the following vow:  After performing pujã of 
Bhagvãn,  a  person  should  perform dandvats according  to  his  daily 
practice.    After  this,  to  make  up  for  knowingly  and  unknowingly 
harming  a bhakta of Bhagvãn during  the  day,  by  thought,  word,  or 

GADHADÃ II 
- 538 - 
deed,  he  should  perform  one  extra dandvat every  day.    This  is  my 
ãgnã; so please do abide by it.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 40 || 173 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 41 
A Bone Is The Form Of Mãn 
 
41.1 
In  the Samvat year  1880,  on Kãrtik vad 11  [28
th
 November,  1823], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  large  decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  west-facing  rooms  of  Dãdã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.  He was wearing garlands of yellow flowers around His neck, 
and tassels of yellow flowers had been inserted in His pãgh.  A sabhã 
of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before Him. 
 
41.2 
Out  of  compassion,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  began  to  preach  to  His 
bhaktas, saying, “When a person who wishes to worship Bhagvãn 
receives an opportunity to serve Bhagvãn and His bhaktas, he should 
serve   them   considering   it   to   be   his   extremely   great   fortune.  
Moreover,  he  should  do  so  only  with bhakti,  for  the  sake  of  pleasing 
Bhagvãn and for his own kalyãn – not for the sake of receiving praise 
from others. 
 
41.3
 “However,  the  nature  of  a  person  is  such  that  he  only  enjoys  doing 
that  which satisfies  his  pride.    Without  that,  he  does  not  enjoy 
performing  even bhakti of Bhagvãn.    For  example,  a  dog  takes  a  dry 
bone  to  an  isolated  place  to  chew  on.    As  a  result  of  the  chewing,  its 
mouth  is  grazed  and  the  bone  becomes  covered  in  blood.    Then, 
licking the bone, the dog becomes overjoyed.  But, little does the fool 
realise, ‘The taste that I am enjoying is that of the blood from my own 
mouth’.    In  the  same  way,  even  a bhakta of Bhagvãn is  unable  to 
abandon  the  bone  (pride).    In  fact,  all  the  spiritual  activities  he 

GADHADÃ II 
- 539 - 
performs are governed by pride; they are not performed for the sole 
purpose   of   pleasing Bhagvãn,   while   thinking   of   them   as bhakti 
towards Bhagvãn.    Moreover,  of  all  the bhakti that  he  does  offer  to 
Bhagvãn, he does so only when it nourishes his pride, but not for the 
sole purpose of pleasing Bhagvãn. 
 
41.4 
“There must be very  few bhaktas like Ratanji  and  Miyãji  who  offer 
bhakti to Bhagvãn solely for the purpose of pleasing Bhagvãn without 
any   cravings   for   praise.      However,   not   everyone   is   capable   of 
abandoning the taste of praise.” 
 
41.5 
In reference to this, Muktãnand Swãmi recited a verse by Tulsidãs: 
 
kanak tajyo kãmini tajyo, tajyo dhãtuko sang 
tulsi laghu bhojan kari, jeeve mãn ke rang 
Tulsi says:  he has abandoned women, wealth, and possessions. 
But, he lives on praise alone, the greatest of all obsessions. 
 
41.6 
Hearing this verse, Shreeji Mahãrãj added, “The enjoyment which a 
person  experiences  from  pride  cannot  be  obtained  from  any  other 
object.  Therefore, amongst all bhaktas, a person who abandons pride 
and  worships Bhagvãn should  be  known  to  be  an  extremely  great 
bhakta.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 41 || 174 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 42 
Sagun And Nirgun Aspects Of Akshar 
  
42.1 
In the Samvat year 1880,  on Mãgshar vad 12  [29
th
 December, 1823], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   the   veranda 
outside  the  east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.  
He was dressed entirely in white clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 540 - 
 
42.2 
Then, Bhagvadãnand Swãmi asked Shreeji Mahãrãj, “In what way do 
countless millions of brahmãnds dwell within each and every pore of 
Bhagvãn?    Also,  where  in  the brahmãnds do  the avatãrs of Bhagvãn 
occur?” 
 
42.3 
Shreeji   Mahãrãj   replied,  “There  are  two  aspects  of Purushottam 
Bhagvãn’s Akshardhãm.  The first is the sagun aspect, and the other is 
the nirgun aspect.    On  the  other  hand, Purushottam  Nãrãyan cannot 
be  described  as nirgun.    The  distinction  of sagun and nirgun applies 
only to Akshar. 
 
42.4 
“The nirgun aspect Akshar has  an  extremely  subtle svarup,  smaller 
than  even  an  atom,  while  the sagun svarup is much  larger  than  even 
the  largest  of  objects.    Countless  millions  of brahmãnds dwell  like 
mere atoms in each and every hair of that Akshar.  It is not that those 
brahmãnds become  small  compared  to Akshar;  they  still  remain 
encircled by the eight barriers (jad prakruti).  But, it is because of the 
extreme  vastness  of Akshar that  those brahmãnds appear  so  small.  
Take  Mount  Girnãr  as an  example.    Compare  to  Mount  Meru,  it 
appears  to  be  extremely  small.    However,  compared  to  Mount  Lokã-
Lok,  Mount  Meru  itself  appears  to  be  extremely  small.    In  the  same 
way, the brahmãnds remain exactly as they are, but in comparison to 
the  extreme  vastness  of Akshar,  they  appear  to  be  extremely  small.  
This is why they are described as being like atoms. 
 
42.5 
“Akshar-Brahm itself  is  like  the  sun;  when  the  sun  rises,  all  ten 
directions  can  be  determined  in  relation  to  it.   Akshardhãm is  like 
that; above, below, in all four sides of that Akshar – in all directions – 
are millions of brahmãnds. 
 
42.6 
“Moreover, Bhagvãn forever  remains  present  in  that Akshardhãm; 
and His wish always prevails.  While remaining in Akshardhãm itself, 
He   takes   birth   in   whatever svarup is   required   in   whichever 
brahmãnd.  For example, Shree Krishna Bhagvãn has only one svarup, 

GADHADÃ II 
- 541 - 
but  during  the rãs-leelã he  assumed  as  many svarups as  there  were 
gopis.      In   the   same   way, Purushottam   Bhagvãn takes   birth   in 
whatever svarup is required in  whichever brahmãnd – while  at  the 
same  time  remaining  in Akshardhãm.    Actually,  He  Himself  forever 
dwells in Akshardhãm.  Wherever that svarup of Purushottam resides, 
is the very centre of Akshardhãm.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 42 || 175 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 43 
Becoming Brahm-Svarup 
 
43.1 
In  the Samvat year  1880,  on Posh sud 4  [5
th
 January,  1824],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  seated  on  a  mattress  with  a  large, 
cylindrical pillow at the residence of the bhaktas of Ayodhyã in Dãdã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from various places, 
had  gathered  before  Him.    Premãnand  Swãmi  was  singing kirtans to 
the accompaniment of a sarodã. 
 
43.2
 Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “Let  us  conduct  a  question-answer 
discussion.”  So, Shreeji Mahãrãj Himself asked, “A bhakta of Bhagvãn 
who  is gunãtit behaves  only  as  the ãtmã,  above  the  influence  of  the 
three guns – above sattva-gun in the form of vairãgya, above rajo-gun 
in the form of desires for vishays, and above tamo-gun in the form of 
passiveness.    He  has  absolutely  no  thoughts, and  experiences a  state 
like sushupti.    Now,  does  such  a nirgun bhakta who  behaves  as  the 
ãtmã in this way have love for Bhagvãn, or not?  That is the question.” 
 
43.3 
Muktãnand Swãmi replied, “A person who behaves as the ãtmã does 
have love for Bhagvãn.” 
 
43.4 
Hearing the reply, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Is the love of a bhakta, 
who  behaves  as  the ãtmã,  of  the  same  qualities  as  the ãtmã,  or 
different?” 

GADHADÃ II 
- 542 - 
43.5 
Muktãnand Swãmi replied, “That love has the same qualities as the 
ãtmã.” 
 
43.6 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then explained, “Regarding the love developed for 
Bhagvãn while behaving as the ãtmã, Madhav-Ãchãrya, Nimbãrk, and 
Vallabh-Ãchãrya   have   all   described   that   love   as brahm-svarup.  
Therefore,  only  a  person  who  has  love  for Bhagvãn having  become 
gunãtit brahm-svarup.  Such is the principle of the great ãchãryas.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 43 || 176 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 44 
The Characteristics Of Religious And Demonic People 
 
44.1 
In  the Samvat year  1880,  on Posh sud 8  [9
th
 January,  1824],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  the  veranda  outside  the 
east-facing  rooms  of  Dãdã  Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was 
dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
44.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked Muktãnand Swãmi, “When a person 
perceives  an avgun in  a bhakta, does  that  person  perceive  the  same 
amount of avgun in that bhakta as he had noticed previously, or does 
he perceive more avgun?” 
 
44.3 
Muktãnand  Swãmi  replied,  “Apparently,  he  perceives  the  same 
amount of avgun as he previously perceived.” 
 
44.4
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  said,  “You  have  missed  the  point  of  the 
question.    If  he  perceives  exactly  the  same  amount  of avgun,  then 
how can you say that he has perceived an avgun?  In actual fact, it is 
due  to  the  influence  of  unpleasant desh, kãl, kriyã,  and sang,  that  his 
intellect  becomes  spoiled;  and  that  is  why  he  perceives  more avgun.  

GADHADÃ II 
- 543 - 
In   this   situation,   a   person   should   realise   that   the   blemish   of 
unpleasant circumstances has ruined his intellect. 
 
44.5 
“Moreover,  I  personally  feel, ‘If  a  person  previously  has  kept  the 
company of the great sant or has had the darshan of Bhagvãn, then he 
will  only  perceive  his  own  avgun but  will  never  perceive  avgun in  any 
other bhakta of Bhagvãn’.  A person with such characteristics should 
be known to be religious. 
 
44.6 
“On the other hand, a person who is demonic never perceives even a 
single avgun within himself; instead, he perceives only avgun in other 
bhaktas.    A  person  with  such  an  intellect  should  be  known  to  be 
demonic.  If such a demonic person happens to be in satsang, or if he 
stays in the company of sãdhus, he will be similar to Kãlnemi, Rãvan, 
and Rãhu; but, he will not be influenced by the company of sãdhus. 
 
44.7 
“Therefore, a person who is a strict bhakta of Bhagvãn perceives only 
his own avgun; he never notices the avgun of other bhaktas.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 44 || 177 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 45 
The Ãgnã Of Remaining Attentive 
 
45.1 
In  the Samvat year  1880,  on Posh vad 1 [17
th
 January,  1824],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  the  veranda  outside  the 
east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was 
dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
45.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “All of you munis, brahm-chãris, satsangi 
grahasthas, pãrshads, and the bhaktas of Ayodhyã are said to be mine.  
So, if I was not attentive in having all of you behave accordingly, and 

GADHADÃ II 
- 544 - 
if you were to then behave waywardly, I would not be able to tolerate 
this.    In  actual  fact,  I  do  not  want  even  the  slightest  imperfection  to 
remain  in  those  who  are said  to  be  mine.    However,  you  should also 
remain very attentive, because if you allow even a little carelessness, 
your footing in satsang will not last. 
 
45.3
 “Furthermore, as you are bhaktas of Bhagvãn,  I  do  not  wish  to  leave 
any  form  of  improper svabhãvs within  your  hearts.    Also,  I  do  not 
wish  to  allow  any  trace  of  any  of Mãyã’s three gun,  ten indriyas,  ten 
prãns, four antah-karans, five bhuts, panch-vishays, and the devs of the 
fourteen loks to  remain.   Instead,  I  wish  to  make  all  of  you such  that 
you  offer bhakti to Bhagvãn and  realise  your  true svarup to  be  the 
ãtmã,  which  is  eternal  and  is  free  from  all  of  these mãyik flaws.    In 
fact, I wish not to allow any influence of mãyã to remain within you.  
If  all  of  your  imperfections  are  not  eradicated  in  this  very  lifetime, 
then  I  will  take  you  to Badrikãshram,  where  all  of  your  worldly 
desires will be burnt to ashes by performing tap; or I will take you to 
Shvet-Dvip and  burn  all  of  your  worldly  desires  to  ashes  by  having 
you perform tap with the niranna-muktas.  However, I do not wish to 
allow  any  love  for  anything  except Bhagvãn to  remain.    For  this 
reason, all the bhaktas and munis should remain attentive.” 
 
45.4 
Having delivered this talk, Shreeji Mahãrãj returned to His residence. 
 
45.5 
Later,  in  the  evening  of  that  same  day,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  held  another 
sabhã.  After the ãrti was completed, He said, “By performing sãttvik 
karmas,  a  person  goes  to  Dev-Lok;  by  performing rãjas karmas,  a 
person  goes  to  Mrutyu-Lok;  and  by  performing tãmas  karmas,  a 
person  goes  to  the  lower loks.    However,  someone  may  doubt, ‘If by 
performing   rãjas   karmas   a   person   attains   Mrutyu-Lok,   then   that 
suggests  that  all  those  of  Mrutyu-Lok  should  experience the  same  joys 
and miseries’.  So, the answer to this is that although there is only one 
particular rajo-gun, countless types of distinctions are created within 
it   due   to   the   influence   of   differing   factors,   like desh and kãl.  
Therefore,  it  is  not  the  case that  there  is  one  certain  type  of rãjas 

GADHADÃ II 
- 545 - 
karma.  In actual fact, the type of karmas performed varies according 
to the factors of desh, kãl, kriyã, and sang. 
 
45.6 
“Having said this, if a person performs some karma which displeases 
the sant of Bhagvãn’s or an avatãr of Bhagvãn, he will suffer miseries 
similar to those of Yampuri in this very body here in Mrutyu-Lok.  On 
the other hand, if a person performs a karma by which Bhagvãn and 
His bhaktas are  pleased,  then  he  will  enjoy  bliss  similar  to  that  of 
attaining Akshardhãm in this very body. 
 
45.7
 “Furthermore, if a person were to displease Bhagvãn and  His sant, 
then despite the fact that he had performed such karmas that would 
have  led  him  to Svarg,  all  those karmas would  be  destroyed  and  he 
would  instead  be sent  to Narak.    Conversely,  if  a  person  were  to 
perform  a karma by  which Bhagvãn and  His sant are  pleased,  then 
even  if  he  were  destined  to  fall  into Narak,  all  of  his  impure karmas 
would   be   destroyed   and   he   would   instead   attain Akshardhãm.  
Therefore,  a  person  who  is  wise  should  behave  only  in  a  way  that 
would please Bhagvãn and His bhaktas.  He should even advise all of 
his  relatives, ‘We should behave only in a way that would please 
Bhagvãn and His sant, and in a way by which they would shower their 
grace upon us’. 
 
45.8 
“In fact, Agni must  have  also  pleased Bhagvãn and  His  sant,  because 
only  then  would  he  have  attained  his  light.   Surya, Chandra,  and  all 
others  who  possess  light,  must  also  have  pleased Bhagvãn and  His 
sant by  performing religious karmas,  as  only  then  would  they  have 
attained such light.  In fact, all of those who are happy in Dev-Lok and 
Mrutyu-Lok must have pleased Bhagvãn and His sant, because it is by 
their grace that they are happy.   
 
45.9 
“Therefore, a person who aspires  for  the  good  of  his  own ãtmã 
should observe the svadharma prescribed in the shãstras, and do only 
that which pleases Bhagvãn and His sant.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 45 || 178 || 

GADHADÃ II 
- 546 - 
Gadhadã II – 46 
Progression and Regression Does Not Affect A Sat-Purush 
 
46.1 
In the Samvat year 1880, on Posh vad 11 [26
th
 January 1824], Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  the  veranda  outside  the 
west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was 
dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes,  and  had covered  Himself  with  a 
yellow rajãi made of chhint.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas 
from  various  places,  had  gathered  before  Him.    Some  of  the sãdhus 
were singing kirtans to the accompaniment of a jhãnjh and mrudang. 
 
46.2 
After the singing concluded, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “A sat-purush living 
in  this  world  is  not  pleased  or  pained  upon  seeing  the  worldly 
progress or regress of a person.  However, when someone’s mind 
falls  back  from  the  path  of Bhagvãn,  he  does  become  grieved.    After 
all, life is so short; and if a person’s afterlife is ruined, it would indeed 
be a great loss for that person. 
 
46.3 
“In fact, Bhagvãn assumes avatãrs upon  earth  for  the  purpose  of 
establishing dharma,  and  not  simply  for  the  establishment  of  the 
dharma of a person’s varna and ãshram.  After all, even the ãchãryas 
of pravrutti dharma,  such  as  the  Saptarshi,  have  established  the 
dharma of  the  four varna and ãshrams.    However, Bhagvãn does  not 
assume avatãrs solely   for   that   purpose;   He   assumes avatãrs to 
develop the dharma of His ekãntik bhaktas. 
 
46.4 
“For such ekãntik  bhaktas,  leaving  the  body  is  not  considered  to  be 
death; for them, falling from that ekãntik dharma is true death.  This 
occurs  when  a  dislike  arises  in  the  heart  towards Bhagvãn or  His 
sant.    That bhakta should  then  be  known  to  have  fallen  from  the 
dharma of ekãntik bhaktas.  For example, if he has fallen due to krodh, 
it should be known that he has received the body of a snake; and if he 
has  fallen  due  to kãm,  it should  be  known  that he has  taken  birth  as 
an evil spirit or a demon. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 547 - 
46.5 
“Nevertheless, despite having attained such bodies and having fallen 
from ekãntik dharma, those who observe dharma or perform tap will 
attain    Dev-Lok    due    to    their    observance    of dharma or    their 
performance  of tap.    However,  a  person  who  has  a  dislike  towards 
Bhagvãn or  His  sant  will  certainly  not  attain  the dhãm of Bhagvãn.  
On the other hand, even if a person has committed the five great sins, 
if he has not perceived an avgun in Bhagvãn or His sant, then his sins 
will be burned, and he will dwell in the dhãm of Bhagvãn.  Therefore, 
to  perceive avgun in Bhagvãn and  His bhakta is  a  greater  sin  than 
committing the five great sins.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 46 || 179 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 47 
The Desire To Perform Bhakti After Becoming Brahm-Rup 
 
47.1 
In  the Samvat year  1880,  on Mahã vad 10  [24
th
 February  1824], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   the   veranda 
outside  the  east-facing rooms of Dada Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.  
He  was dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes  and  had  covered  Himself 
with  a  yellow rajãi made  of chhint.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
47.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “If a person has a group of sãdhus staying 
with  him,  and  if  he  can  sincerely  look  after  them  graciously,  those 
sãdhus will happily stay with him.  However, if he does not know how 
to look after them, they will not stay with him. 
 
47.3 
“Furthermore, if a sãdhu is  eager  to  attain moksh,  he  would  become 
increasingly  overjoyed  when  I  do  something  that  may  upset  him  or 
when  I  criticise  the vishays.    For  example,  Muktãnand  Swãmi  has 
contracted  tuberculosis,  and  so  he  is  restricted  from  eating  yoghurt, 
milk,  and  any  sweet  or  fried  foods.    A  wise  person  would  think  to 
himself, ‘This disease has restricted all tasty food and drink; therefore I 

GADHADÃ II 
- 548 - 
wonder if I have actually attained the company of a great sãdhu in the 
appearance of tuberculosis!’  This  is  how  a  wise  person  would  view 
the  situation.     This is  because  a  person’s  desires  regarding  the 
genitals   and   the   stomach   are   characteristics   of   an asat person.  
However, tuberculosis is disease that removes both flaws.  Therefore, 
a mumukshu should not feel hurt when a sat-purush, in the same way 
as that disease, criticises vishays. 
 
47.4 
“Also, if a person is staying with a senior sãdhu due to the temptation 
of obtaining tasty food or drink, or due to the temptation of obtaining 
nice  clothes,  or  due  to  the  temptation  of  collecting  objects  that  he 
likes,  then  he  should  not  be  considered  a sãdhu at  all.    Instead,  he 
should be known to be an extremely wretched person and like a dog.  
A  person  who  has  such  corrupt  intentions  will  ultimately  fall  from 
satsang. 
 
47.5 
“Furthermore, if someone should give a sãdhu a nice object, a person 
who  becomes  jealous  as  well  as  the  person  who  is  greedy  for  the 
panch-vishays are   both   much   worse   than   a   person   who   has 
committed  the  five  great  sins.    Therefore,  a  person  who  is  wise 
should  remain  in  the  company  of sãdhus and  not  have  any  impure 
intentions   within.      After   all,   this sabhã is   like   the sabhã in 
Badrikãshram and Shvet-Dvip; if a person’s worldly desires are not 
eradicated here, where else will he be able to eradicate them? 
 
47.6 
“Moreover, our jeevs have  previously  indulged  in  the panch-vishays 
through  countless  bodies,  as devs and  humans.    Nevertheless,  we 
have not been happy with those vishays.  Therefore, now that we are 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn, indulging in the vishays for a further year, or two 
years,  or  maybe  even  five  years  will  still  not  fulfil  us.    It  is  as  if  the 
earth has been split down to Pãtãl, and we begin to fill it with water, 
it  can  never  be  filled.    Similarly,  the indriyas have  never  become 
satisfied  by  the vishays,  and  they  never  will  be.    So,  a  person  should 
eradicate  his  attachment  to  the vishays.    Furthermore,  he  should 
consider  the  qualities  of  the sãdhu who  speaks  to  him  harshly  and 

GADHADÃ II 
- 549 - 
should  not  think  unkindly  of  him.    This  is  explained  in  the  following 
kirtan composed  by  Muktãnand  Swãmi: ‘Shuli Upar Shayan Karãve 
Toy  Sãdhu-Ne  Sange  Rahiye  Re...’ – a  person  should  remain  in  the 
company  of sãdhus, even  if  he  has  to  suffer  the  pain  of  a shuli.  
Therefore, a person should take hold of this opportunity and die only 
after  eradicating  his  impure  desires;  he  should not  die  with  his 
impure desires still remaining. 
 
47.7 
“Having said this though, a person should keep the following desire: 
‘After leaving this body, I want to become brahm-rup  like  Nãrad,  the 
Sanakãdik, and Shukji, and offer bhakti to Bhagvãn’ .    During  this 
process,  even  if  he  has  to  go  to  Brahm-Lok  or  Indra-Lok,  there  is 
nothing to worry about.  For example, if a person goes to answer the 
call of nature, and then falls headfirst into the gutter, he should take a 
bath  and  become  pure  again;  he  should  not remain  in  the  filth.  
Similarly, if a person has pure desires and as a result attains Brahm-
Lok  or  Indra-Lok,  he  should  think, ‘I have fallen headfirst into the 
gutter’.    Thinking  in  this  way,  he  should  discard  the  pleasures  of 
Brahm-Lok and Indra-Lok using the strength of his pure desires and 
make his way to the dhãm of Bhagvãn.  He should be determined not 
to stop anywhere in between. 
 
47.8 
“Also, just as the grahasthas or tyãgis serve us, we should also realise 
their   greatness.      For   example,   Mulji   Brahm-Chãri   realises   my 
greatness  and  serves  me.    In  the  same  way,  I  realise  his  greatness.  
Therefore, as  the grahasthas serve us  by  providing  food  and  clothes, 
we  should  also  realize  their  greatness  and  serve  them  by  preaching 
to them.  In this way, we should develop friendship among bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn by realising the greatness of each other.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 47 || 180 || 
 
 

GADHADÃ II 
- 550 - 
Gadhadã II – 48 
‘Vandu Sahajãnand’  
Taking Birth In The Company Of Sant 
   
48.1
 In  the Samvat year  1880,  on Mahã vad 14  [28
th
 February  1824], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   the   veranda 
outside  the  east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.  
He was dressed entirely in white clothes and was wearing new, white 
kanthis made  from tulsi beads,  around  His  neck.    In  addition  to  this, 
tassels of yellow flowers decorated His pãgh, and garlands of flowers 
were   hanging   around   His   neck.      A sabhã of munis,   as   well   as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him.  
 
48.2 
In  the sabhã,  Premãnand Swãmi was singing ‘Vandu  Sahajãnand  Ras 
Rup, Anupam Sãr-Ne Re Lol...’ – kirtans useful for dhyãn.  After he had 
finished singing, Shreeji Mahãrãj commented, “The kirtans you  sang 
were  very  wonderful.    After  listening  to  them  I  thought  in  my  mind, 
‘Since this sãdhu thinks about Bhagvãn’s svarup in this way, let me get 
up and perform dhyãn before him’. 
 
48.3
 “If a person is able to think about Bhagvãn in his antah-karans in this 
way,  and  if  he  were  to  die  while  still  holding  such  a  desire  for 
Bhagvãn,  he  would definitely  not  have  to  take  another  birth.    If  he 
engages   in   such dhyãn of Bhagvãn,   he   has   certainly   attained 
Akshardhãm while  alive.    In  addition,  he  can  be  said  to  be  in  the 
process of becoming a niranna-mukta just like the niranna-muktas in 
Shvet-Dvip.  Such  a  person  performs  the  bodily  activities  that  are 
necessary without effort.  In fact, a person who is able to think about 
Bhagvãn’s svarup like this has become fulfilled and has nothing more 
left to achieve. 
 
48.4
 “On the other hand, if a person dies while thinking about things other 
than Bhagvãn,  there  will  be  no  end  to  his  miseries  for  countless 
millions  of  years.    So,  now  that  such  an  opportunity  has  arisen,  a 
person  should  seize  it  and,  after  discarding  any  thoughts  about 
objects other than Bhagvãn, should think about His svarup only. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 551 - 
48.5
 “However, if a person is unable to think about Bhagvãn’s svarup,  he 
should  remain  in  the  company  of  a sãdhu who  possesses dharma, 
gnãn, vairãgya,  and bhakti.    As  for  myself,  I  have  only  this  desire 
within: ‘When I abandon this body, although there will be no reason for 
me  to  take  birth  again,  I  feel  in  my  heart  that  I  should  make  a  reason 
and take birth in the company of such sãdhus’.  This is all I wish for. 
 
48.6 
“However, if a person is able to think about Bhagvãn as described in 
the above kirtan, then he is freed from the bondage of Kãl, karma, and 
Mãyã.  In fact, regardless of the family in which he person happens to 
be   born,   his   parents   should   also   be   considered   to   be   fulfilled.  
Conversely,  a  person  who  thinks  about  the vishays,  and  does  not 
think of Bhagvãn, should be considered as being totally lost. 
 
48.7 
“After all, regardless of the life-form in which a person takes birth, he 
will be able to have a wife, a son, and possessions such as wealth and 
other  objects.    However,  the  company  of  a sãdhu who  is  knower  of 
brahm,  as  well  as  the  direct darshan and  thought  of Shree Vãsudev 
Bhagvãn are   extremely   rare.      Therefore,   there   is   no   greater 
advantage   of   possessing   this   human   body   than   being   able   to 
constantly  think  about Bhagvãn in  the  heart – just  as  a  person 
engrossed  in  the vishays constantly  think  about  them  in  the antah-
karans.    Such  a  person  is  also  the  greatest  amongst  all bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn.    Even  if  he  does  indulge  in  the panch-vishays,  all  would  be 
related only to Bhagvãn.  His ears wish to continuously listen to talks 
related  to Bhagvãn;  his  skin  wishes to  touch Bhagvãn;  his  eyes  with 
to  have  the darshan of Bhagvãn and  His sant;  his  tongue  wishes  to 
taste  the prasãd  of Bhagvãn;  and  his  nose  wishes  to  smell  the 
fragrance  of  flowers  and tulsi which  have  been  offered  to Bhagvãn.  
Apart  from Bhagvãn,  he  considers  nothing  else  to  be  a  source  of 
happiness.    A  person  who  behaves  in  this  way,  can  be  called  an 
ekãntik bhakta of Bhagvãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 48 || 181 || 

GADHADÃ II 
- 552 - 
Gadhadã II – 49 
Differences Between Bhagvãn’s Svarup And Mãyik Svarups 
 
49.1 
In  the Samvat year  1880,  on Fãgan sud 2  [1
st
 March  1824],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress  with  a  large, 
cylindrical  pillow  that  had  been  placed  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on 
the  veranda  outside  the  west-facing medi in  front  of  the mandir of 
Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He 
was dressed entirely in white clothes, and a garland of white flowers 
was hanging from His pãgh.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
49.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “There is a great difference between the 
pratyaksha svarup of Bhagvãn and mãyik svarup.    However,  those 
who  are  ignorant  and  those  who  are  utter  fools  consider Bhagvãn’s 
svarup and mãyik svarups to  be  the  same.    Those  who see mãyik 
svarups and  those  who  think  about mãyik svarups spend  countless 
millions of years wandering in the cycle of births and deaths.  In the 
comparison, those who do the darshan of Bhagvãn’s svarup and those 
who  think  about  it,  escape  from  the  bondage of Kãl, karma,  and, 
Mãyã; attain Akshardhãm; and become pãrshads of Bhagvãn.  It is for 
this  reason  that  my  mind  never  becomes  full  with kathãs, kirtans, 
talks related to Bhagvãn, or dhyãn of Bhagvãn.  All of you should also 
do the same.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 49 || 182 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 50 
The Fundamental Principle 
Love For A Sant 
 
50.1 
In  the Samvat year  1880,  on  the  night  of Chaitra vad 2  [15
th
 April 
1824], Swãmi Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on the veranda 
outside the west-facing medi in front of the mandir of Shree Vãsudev-

GADHADÃ II 
- 553 - 
Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed 
entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
50.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “As I consider all of you to be mine, today 
I am going to reveal to you my fundamental principle.”  He then 
continued, “Just as rivers merge into the sea, just as a sati and a moth 
burn  in  a  fire,  and  just  as  the  brave  sacrifice  themselves on  the 
battlefield,  in  the  same  way,  I  have  kept  my ãtmã absorbed  in  the 
pure  and  perfect brahm.    I  have  also  forever  attached  myself  with 
undying  love  to Purushottam Bhagvãn – who  possesses  a  definite 
svarup – and  to  His bhaktas dwelling  in  the  radiant Akshardhãm.    In 
fact,  I  have  no  love  for  anything  other  than  them.    This  is  what  I 
constantly experience. 
 
50.3
 “Outwardly, I do not make a display of the intensity of my tyãg.  
However, when I look into my heart and towards the hearts of other 
bhaktas, even the senior paramhans and senior sãnkhya-yogi  women 
all  seem  to  have  some  trace  of  the  world  remaining – whereas 
worldly  desires  never  arise  in  my  heart;  not  even  in  my  dreams.    It 
also seems to me that no one is capable of making me falter from my 
bhakti towards Bhagvãn and His bhaktas. 
 
50.4 
“In  addition,  even  before  a  person  had  been  graced  with  the 
attainment  of Bhagvãn, Kãl (a  power  of Bhagvãn)  was  unable  to 
destroy  the jeev;  karmas were  unable  to  destroy  the jeev;  not  even 
Mãyã was  able  to  absorb  the jeev within  itself.    So,  having  attained 
Bhagvãn,  why  should  a  person  worry  about Kãl, karma,  and Mãyã?  
Bearing this in mind, I have become determined that I do not want to 
develop love for anyone except Bhagvãn and His bhaktas. 
 
50.5 
“Furthermore, I do  not  wish  to  leave  any  trace  of  the  world  in  the 
hearts  of  whosoever  keeps  my  company.    This  is  because  I  only  get 
along with those whose determination is similar to mine.  However, if 

GADHADÃ II 
- 554 - 
a  person  has  desires  for  worldly  pleasures,  that  even  if  I  try  to 
develop  love  for  that  person,  I  cannot  do  so.    Therefore,  only  those 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn who  are  free  of  worldly  desires  are  dear  to  me.  
What I have just told you is my personal principle.” 
 
50.6 
In this way, Shreeji Mahãrãj talked to His bhaktas for the sake of their 
enlightenment. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 50 || 183 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 51 
The Characteristics Of A Person Who Behaves As The Ãtmã 
 
51.1 
In  the Samvat year  1880,  on  the  night  of Chaitra vad 9  [22
nd
 April 
1824],  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress 
with  a  large,  cylindrical  pillow  that  had  been  placed  on  a  decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  south-facing  rooms  of  Dãdã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in   Gadhadã.      A sabhã of munis,   as well   as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
51.2 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  the paramhans, “Often, when the jeev 
enters sushupti,  it  experiences  profound  peace,  whereas  at  other 
times, even when it enters sushupti, its restlessness does not subside.  
What is the reason for this?  That is my question.” 
 
51.3 
The  senior paramhans attempted  to  answer  the  question,  but  were 
unable to give a precise answer. 
 
51.4 
So, Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “That is due to the increase of the force 
of rajo-gun.    So,  even  during  the  state  of sushupti,  the  disturbance  of 
rajo-gun joins  with tamo-gun.    As  a  result,  a  person  experiences  a 
feeling of restlessness even within sushupti.  Therefore, as long as the 
influence   of   the gun remains   within   a   person,   he   will   never 

GADHADÃ II 
- 555 - 
experience  happiness;  he  only  becomes  happy  when  he  behaves  as 
the ãtmã.” 
 
51.5 
Then,  Muktãnand  Swãmi  asked,  “What  are  the  characteristics  of 
someone who behaves as the ãtmã?” 
 
51.6 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “No one is said to be as powerful as Shiv and 
Brahmã.    In  fact,  they  are  the gurus of  even Nãrad;  it  is  difficult  for 
others  to  behave  as  they  do – as brahm-svarup.    Having  said  that, 
when the eight factors of desh, kãl, kriyã, sang, dhyãn, mantra, dikshã, 
and shãstra became  unpleasant,  the harmful  influence  caused  great 
distress in the hearts of even Shiv and Brahmã.  Therefore, regardless 
of how nirgun a person may be, or even if he behaves as the ãtmã, if 
he   encounters   unpleasant   circumstances,   he   will   most   certainly 
experience  distress  within.    So,  no  one  can  ever  become  happy  by 
disobeying the disciplines laid down by the great sant. 
 
51.7 
“For this reason, all tyãgis should  abide  by  the dharma of tyãgis,  all 
grahasthas should abide by the dharma of grahasthas, and all women 
should abide by the dharma of women.  Even in this, a person will not 
become happy if he behaves less than what is prescribed; nor will he 
become happy by behaving beyond what is prescribed.  After all, the 
dharma prescribed  in shãstras has been  written  exactly  as Bhagvãn 
has narrated; therefore, there can be no discrepancy in it.  Moreover, 
they  are  prescribed  in  such  a  way  that  they  are  easy  to  observe.  
Therefore,   if   a   person   observes   too   much   or   too   little,   he   will 
certainly become unhappy. 
 
51.8
 “So, only a person who follows the commands of a sat-purush can be 
said to be under the influence of pleasant circumstances.  To deviate 
from    those    commands    is    the    very    definition    of    unpleasant 
circumstances.  Therefore, only a person who follows the commands 
of a sat-purush is behaving as the ãtmã.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 51 || 184 || 

GADHADÃ II 
- 556 - 
Gadhadã II – 52 
That Which Is Appropriate For A Tyãgi And Grahastha 
Leave Irshyã And Perform Bhakti With Shraddhã 
 
52.1 
In the Samvat year 1880, on Chaitra vad 11 [24
th
 April 1824], Shreeji 
Mahãrãj arrived at Lakshmi-Vãdi on horseback from Dãdã Khãchar’s 
darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  sat  on  a  square  platform  and  was  dressed 
entirely  in  white  clothes.    He  was  also  wearing  a  garland  of  flowers 
around His neck, and a tassel of flowers decorated His pãgh.  A sabhã 
of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before   Him.      Some   of   the munis were   singing kirtans to   the 
accompaniment of a jhãnjh and mrudang. 
 
52.2 
After  the munis had finished singing, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “I wish to 
speak now, so please listen.  In this world, the path of a tyãgi and the 
path of a grahastha are both different.  The path of a grahastha is not 
appropriate for a tyãgi, and the path of a tyãgi is not appropriate for a 
grahastha.  A person who is wise will realise this, but others will not. 
 
52.3 
“Now,  I  shall  explain  the  distinctions.    Wealth  and  property; 
elephants  and  horses;  cow  and  buffaloes;  houses  and  mansions;  a 
wife and children; and lavish clothes and jewellery are all suitable for 
a grahastha.  However, to live in the forest; to keep no clothes except 
a loincloth; to wear a hat on his head; to shave off his hair, beard, and 
moustache;   to    wear   saffron-coloured   clothes;    and    to    tolerate 
someone swearing  or  throwing  dust  at  him  are  most  suitable  for  a 
tyãgi.    However,  although  these  are  suitable  for  a tyãgi,  they  are  in 
fact  inappropriate  for  a grahastha.    Therefore,  a  person  who  has 
abandoned   the   world   and   become   a tyãgi should   think, ‘Which 
ãshram do I belong to?’  A  wise  person  should  think  about  this;  he 
should not stray onto some inappropriate path like a fool. 
 
52.4 
“Moreover, if a wise person is disciplined by someone, he would in 
turn  consider  his  qualities.    On  the  other  hand,  if  someone  offers 

GADHADÃ II 
- 557 - 
some  useful  advice  to  a  fool,  the  fool  would  be  offended.    In  that 
respect,  Mulji  Brahm-Chãri  and  Ratanji  are  never  offended;  that  is 
why I get along very well with them. 
 
52.5 
“Also, I like a person who performs sevã with shraddhã.  Conversely, 
if  someone  who  does  not  have shraddhã were  to  bring  me  a  meal,  I 
would not like the food; or if they were to bring some clothes, I would 
not like to wear them; or if they were to perform my pujã, I would not 
like that pujã.  However, if someone offers something with shraddhã, 
I like it very much. 
 
52.6 
“Furthermore, even if someone offers bhakti with shraddhã,  if  he 
becomes jealous of someone else who comes to offer bhakti, then I do 
not  like  that.    Therefore,  I  very  much  prefer  a  person  who  offers 
bhakti with shraddhã and without jealousy.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 52 || 185 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 53 
Not Being Able To Perceive Avgun  
 
53.1 
In  the Samvat year  1880,  on Vaishãkh sud 5  [3
rd
 May  1824],  Swãmi 
Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting upon a mattress with a large, 
cylindrical  pillow  in  His  residence  in  Dãdã  Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Gadhadã.  He was dressed entirely in white clothes.  A sabhã of munis, 
as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
53.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “The characteristics of moh as  described 
in the shãstras are as follows:  When moh pervades a person’s heart, 
he  simply  cannot  perceive  his  own avgun.    Therefore,  for  a  person 
not to perceive his own avgun is the very definition of delusion. 
 
53.3
 “Moreover, everyone has extreme pride of the wisdom that they 
possess, but they do not think, ‘I do not even know anything about my 
own jeev.  Is the jeev within this body black, or is it white?  Is it long, or 

GADHADÃ II 
- 558 - 
is it short?’  They  know  nothing  about  their  own jeev,  yet  they  find 
avgun in  the  great sant or  in Bhagvãn.    They  feel, ‘Although He is a 
great sant or Bhagvãn, this much He is not doing properly’.    Though 
they  find avgun in  this  way,  little  do  the  fools  realise  that Bhagvãn 
sees  all  the jeevs and ishvars who  dwell  in  the  countless  millions  of 
brahmãnds as  clearly  as  He  sees  a  drop  of  water  in  His  palm.    He  is 
also  the  supporter  of  countless  millions  of brahmãnds;  He  is  the 
husband  of  Lakshmi;  and  He  is  the  creator,  sustainer,  and  destroyer 
of  countless  millions  of brahmãnds.    Even Shesh, Shãrada, Brahmã, 
and other devs are unable to comprehend the extent of His greatness.  
In  fact,  even  the  Veds  describe  His  glory  as ‘neti neti’ implying that 
the glory of Bhagvãn is unparalleled. 
 
53.4
 “Therefore,  a  person  who  perceives avgun either   in Bhagvãn’s 
charitras or  in  His  understanding  should  be  known  to  be  a vimukh 
and  a  sinner.    In  fact,  he  should  be  considered  to  be  the  king  of  all 
fools.  The understanding of Bhagvãn and His bhaktas is beyond this 
world.    Then,  how can  a  person  who  believes  his self  to  be  the body 
possibly comprehend it? 
 
53.5
 “So, it is simply out of foolishness that a person perceives flaws in 
Bhagvãn and His bhaktas and therefore falls from the path of 
Bhagvãn; but Bhagvãn’s true bhakta, the sat-purush, continues to act 
in a alokik way.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 53 || 186 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 54 
Satsang Is The Greatest Spiritual Activity 
 
54.1 
In  the Samvat year  1880,  in  the  afternoon  on Jyeshth sud 7  [3
rd
 June 
1824],  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  arrived  at  Lakshmi-Vãdi 
on  horseback from Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    After  riding 
the horse for quite some time, He sat down on a square platform.  He 

GADHADÃ II 
- 559 - 
was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    He  had  also  tied  a  black-
bordered  cloth  around  His  head.    In  addition  to  this,  a  garland of 
mogrã flowers   was   hanging   from   His   neck,   and   His pãgh was 
decorated  with  a  tassel  of  flowers.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
54.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked the munis, “In the twelfth chapter of the 
eleventh skandh of  Shreemad  Bhãgvat, Shree Krishna Bhagvãn has 
said  to  Uddhav, ‘I am not as pleased by ashtãng-yog,  sãnkhya,  tyãg, 
vrats, yagna, tap, and yãtrã, as I am pleased by satsang’.  This is what 
Bhagvãn has said.  This implies that of all spiritual activities, satsang 
is  the  greatest.    However,  what  are  the  characteristics  of  a  person 
who regards satsang as the greatest spiritual activity?” 
 
54.3 
The munis answered  according  to  their  understanding,  but  none 
could give a precise answer. 
 
54.4 
So, Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A person who regards satsang as  the 
greatest  spiritual  activity  is  deeply  attached  only  to  the sant of 
Bhagvãn.  For example, if a king who is childless receives a son in old 
age,  then  even  if  that  son  swears  at  the  king  or  misbehaves,  like  by 
pulling his moustache, the king would not find faults in him.  Even if 
the  son  hits  another  child  or  causes  problems  in  the  village,  still  the 
king  would  never  attribute  faults  to  his  child.    This  is  because  the 
king  is  profoundly  attached  to  his  son.    Likewise, only  a  person  who 
develops  such  deep  attachment  for  the bhaktas of Bhagvãn has 
realised satsang to  be  the  most kalyãn-kãri of  all  spiritual  activities.  
This fact has been described in the Shreemad Bhãgvat: 
 
yasyãtmã-buddhiha kunape tri-dhãtuke svadheeha kalatradishu bhauma iyadheeha 
yat-teertha-buddhiha salile na karhichij-janeshva-bhigneshu sa eva gokharaha 
If a person regards the body to be his own self; regards his wife and children to 
be his own; regards the murtis of Bhagvãn made from earth to be respected; 
and regards water to be sacred like a place of pilgrimage, but does not regard 
the enlightened bhakta of Bhagvãn in this way, then he is the most disgraceful 
of all animals, a wild donkey. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 560 - 
“This verse has stated the fact appropriately.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 54 || 185 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 55 
Perform The Nine Types Of Bhakti After Becoming Brahm-Rup 
A Goldsmith’s Workshop 
 
55.1 
In  the Samvat year  1880,  on Jyeshth sud 11  [7
th
 June  1824],  Swãmi 
Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a large decorate bedstead 
on  the  veranda  outside  the  east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s 
darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  had  tied  a  golden-bordered,  white moliyu 
from Navãnagar around His head.  He was wearing a white khes and 
had covered Himself with a white pachhedi.  A sabhã of munis, as well 
as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered  before  Him.    Some 
of  the munis were  singing kirtans to  the  accompaniment  of  a jhãnjh 
and mrudang. 
 
55.2 
After the munis had finished singing the kirtans, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, 
“Just as a person possesses some sort of strength today, he must also 
have  had  some  trace  of  it  before  joining satsang.    Therefore,  today  I 
would like all of you to describe whatever type of strength you have.  
To begin, I shall describe the type of strength I have, so please listen. 
 
55.3 
“Even when I was a child, I very much enjoyed going to mandirs for 
darshan,  listening  to kathãs,  keeping  the  company  of sãdhus,  and 
going on yãtrã.  Then, when I left my home, I did not even like to keep 
clothes.  In fact, I like to stay only in the forest, and I was not the least 
bit  afraid.    Even  when  I  came  across  large  snakes,  lions,  elephants, 
and  countless  other  types  of animals in  the  forest, there  was  not  the 
slightest  fear  of  dying  in  my  heart.    In  this  way,  I  always  remained 
fearless in the dense forest.  Thereafter, after travelling to holy places 
of pilgrimage, I met Rãmãnand Swãmi.  Only after Rãmãnand Swãmi 
passed away did I begin to keep a little fear; and that was for the sake 
of satsang. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 561 - 
55.4
 “However, the following thought is constantly in my mind:  When a 
person  is  laid  down  on  his  death-bed  with  death  waiting,  everyone 
loses their self-interest in that person.  The mind of the person who is 
dying  also  becomes  dejected  from  worldly  life.    In  the  same  way,  I 
also  constantly  feel  as  if  death  is  waiting  at  this  moment  for  me,  as 
well as for others.  In fact, I constantly regard each and every worldly 
object   to   be   perishable   and   worthless.      Never   do I   make   any 
distinctions such as, ‘This is a nice object, and this is a bad object’.  All 
worldly   objects   appear   the   same   to   me.      For   example,   when 
considering  the  hairs  of  the  armpit,  which  can  be  considered  good 
and  which  bad?    Good  or  bad,  they  are  all  the  same.    Similarly,  all 
worldly objects appear the same to me. 
 
55.5 
“If I do compliment or criticise something, it is only to please the 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn.  When I say things such as, ‘This is delicious food’, 
or ‘These are nice clothes’,  or ‘This is beautiful jewellery’,  or ‘This is a 
pleasant house’, or ‘This is a fine horse’, or ‘This is a beautiful flower’, it 
is only to please that particular bhakta.  In fact, all of my activities are 
for  the  sake  of  the bhaktas of Bhagvãn;  there  is  not  a  single  activity 
which I perform for my own personal enjoyment.” 
 
55.6 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “The mind of an ekãntik bhakta of Bhagvãn 
thinks of only the svarup of Bhagvãn; his mouth sings only the praises 
of Bhagvãn;  his  hands  engage  only  in  the sevã of Bhagvãn and  His 
bhaktas;  and  his  ears  listen  only  to  the  praises  of Bhagvãn.    In  this 
way, I am able to perform all my activities only after realising them to 
be  a  form  of bhakti to Bhagvãn.    Besides  the bhakti of Bhagvãn,  my 
mind is indifferent to everything else.  For example, if the only son of 
a king dies when the king reaches the age of sixty or seventy, the king 
would   become   disinterested   in   all   things.      In   the   same   way,   I 
constantly  remain  disinterested  while  eating,  drinking,  mounting  a 
horse, and even when I am pleased or displeased. 
 
55.7 
“In addition, a thought also remains within my heart that I am the 
ãtmã, distinct from the body; I am not like this body.  Also, my mind 

GADHADÃ II 
- 562 - 
is always cautious, for fear that a portion of mãyã in the form of rajo-
gun and tamo-gun will  infiltrate  my ãtmã!    In  fact,  I  am  constantly 
attentive of that. 
 
55.8 
“Now, consider the following analogy of a goldsmith’s workshop:  If a 
person  takes  some  pure,  twenty-four-carat gold to the goldsmith’s 
workshop,   but   takes   his   eyes   off   of it   for   even   a   moment,   the 
goldsmith  will  extract  some  of  the  gold  and  alloy  some  silver  in  its 
place.  Similarly, consider the goldsmith’s workshop to be the heart 
and  the  goldsmith  to  be mãyã.    While  the  goldsmith  is  sitting  within 
his  workshop  (heart),  he  is  continuously  hammering  away  with  his 
hammer  of  desires.    Even  his  wife  and  children  secretly  steal  some 
gold  if  they  can  get  their  hands  on  it.    Consider  the indriyas and 
antah-karans to  be  the  wife  and children  of  the  goldsmith  (mãyã);  it 
is  they  who add  silver  (three gun,  attachment  to  the panch-vishays, 
the belief that he is body, and that he has kãm, krodh, and lobh) into 
the  gold  (chaitanya).    They  also  extract  some  gold  (gun,  such  as 
dharma, bhakti, gnãn, and vairãgya). 
 
55.9 “
When  some  gold  is  extracted  and  sliver  is  mixed  in  its  place,  the 
original  gold  diminishes  in  purity  to  become  eighteen-carat  gold.    It 
can be purified again only after melting.  Therefore, the silver of rajo-
gun and tamo-gun,  which  has  been  mixed  into  the jeev, should  be 
filtered  out.    Then,  the  pure ãtmã (gold)  will  remain,  and  no  other 
impurities of mãyã will be left.  This is the thought in which I remain 
engrossed, day and night. 
 
55.10
 “I have therefore described my strength to you.  Now, in the same 
way, please describe your strengths to me.” 
 
55.11 
Then,   the sãdhus said,  “Mahãrãj,  in  no  way  can  there  be  any 
impurities  of mãyã in  you,  as  you  are divya.    The  talk  you  have  just 
delivered also describes our strength; and the thought that you have 
mentioned is actually what all of us should develop in our lives.” 

GADHADÃ II 
- 563 - 
55.12
 Having delivered this talk, Shreeji Mahãrãj bid “Jay Sachidãnand” to 
all and returned to His residence. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 55 || 188 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 56 
Love Only For Bhagvãn 
 
56.1 
In  the Samvat year  1880,  on Ashãdh sud 5  [1
st
 July  1824],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress  with  a  large, 
cylindrical  pillow  that  had  been  placed  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on 
the  veranda  outside  the  east-facing  rooms  of  Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr 
in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of 
munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before Him in a sabhã.  Some of the sãdhus were singing kirtans to the 
accompaniment of a dukad and sarodã. 
 
56.2 
After the singing had finished, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Upon hearing 
these kirtans,  my ãtmã delved  into  deep  thought,  from  which  I  have 
concluded  that  deep  love  for Bhagvãn is  a  great  thing.    Then,  I 
remembered  Gopãlãnand  Swãmi  and  all  the bhaktas who  have  deep 
love for Bhagvãn; and I could see their love towards Bhagvãn in all of 
their antah-karans and jeevs.  Then, I examined my own ãtmã, and it 
appeared  to  me  that  others  do  not  seem  to  have  as  much  love  for 
Bhagvãn as  I  do.    After  all,  if  they  were  to  encounter  unpleasant 
circumstances, then even though they are great, their mind would at 
least  be  slightly  affected.    Therefore,  I  felt  that  ultimately  their 
foundation  appears  to  be  weak.    In  fact,  if  they  were  to  encounter 
extremely  unpleasant  circumstances,  their  love  for Bhagvãn would 
not remain stable at all. 
 
56.3 
“So, after examining everyone, it seems to me that my position is 
better;  regardless  of  the  extent  of  unpleasant  circumstances  that  I 
may encounter, in no way will my antah-karans ever be affected.  If a 

GADHADÃ II 
- 564 - 
person’s love for Bhagvãn is true, he never develops love for anything 
other than Bhagvãn.  In fact, the essence of all shãstras is simply this:  
Bhagvãn is  the  sole  source  of  eternal  bliss  and  the  supreme  essence 
of  everything.    Excluding Bhagvãn,  all  other  objects  are  absolutely 
worthless and totally insignificant. 
 
56.4
 “If a person does have as much love for other objects as he does for 
Bhagvãn,  then  his  foundation  is  indeed  very  weak.    Consider  the 
analogy of a piece of lightly dyed cloth.  It may look very nice initially, 
but  if  water  happens  to  fall  on  it,  and  it  is  then  put  out  to  dry  in  the 
sun,  then  it  becomes  useless.    It  would  become  so  useless  that  it 
would  not  even  remain  like  a  white  piece  of cloth.   In  the same  way, 
when a  person  who  has  affection  for  the panch-vishays encounters 
evil company, a person can never be certain about him. 
 
56.5
 “Therefore, to please Bhagvãn, a bhakta should totally discard the 
panch-vishays.  He should also abandon any affection for objects 
which may obstruct his love for Bhagvãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 56 || 189 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 57 
A ‘Cat-Like’ Bhakta 
 
57.1 
In  the Samvat year  1881,  during  the  even ãrti on Ashãdh sud 6  [2
nd
 
July  1824],  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a 
decorated  bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  east-facing  rooms  of 
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    A  few  torches  had  been  lit.  
Tassels made  of  flowers were  hanging  from  the  white pãgh that had 
been  tied  around  His  head.    He  was  wearing  a  white khes and  had 
covered Himself with a white chãdar.  A sabhã of paramhans, as well 
as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered  before  Him  in  a 
sabhã.        Some    of    the sãdhus were    singing kirtans to    the 
accompaniment of a dukad and sarodã. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 565 - 
57.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Please listen, I wish to speak to all of you.  
When  you  were  singing kirtans,  and  as  I  was  listening  to  them,  a 
thought  occurred  to  me,  which  I  shall  now  share  with  you.    If  a 
person  wants  to  love Bhagvãn,  he  should  love  Him  while  believing 
himself to be the pure ãtmã.  What is that ãtmã like?  Well, within it 
there are no obstructions either of Mãyã or the entities evolved from 
Mãyã (the  three gun,  the  body,  the indriyas,  and  the antah-karans).  
Whatever  obstructions seem  to  be  in  the ãtmã are due  to  ignorance.  
However,  no  obstructions  of  any  form  remain  in  a  person  who  has 
totally  dispelled  them  through gnãn and vairãgya.    However,  to 
behave as the ãtmã does not mean to believe himself to be brahm and 
act waywardly.  In actual fact, the purpose of behaving as the ãtmã is 
to  realise, ‘I am the ãtmã, and there are obstructions of Mãyã within 
me.    If  that  is  so,  how  can  there  be  even  the  slightest  trace  of  Mãyã  in 
Paramãtmã  Nãrãyan  Vãsudev, who is beyond the ãtmã?’  For  this 
reason,  the  quality  of ãtmã-nishthã should  be  firmly  developed  so 
that a person does not perceive any fault in Bhagvãn. 
 
57.3 
“Then, keeping his thought in the midst of the light of the ãtmã,  he 
should  destroy  anything that  tries  to  disturb  him  from  behaving  as 
the ãtmã.    For  example,  when  a  lizard  comes  near  the  light  of  an  oil 
lamp,  it  kills  any  insect  that  comes  near  the  light.    In  the  same  way, 
the   thought   that   rests   within   the   light   of   the ãtmã destroys 
everything apart from the ãtmã. 
 
57.4 
“Furthermore,  if  a  person  truly  loves Bhagvãn,   he   would   never 
develop love for anything else.  If there is an object that appears to be 
dearer to him than Bhagvãn, he would completely discard it.  That is 
true tyãg.  He would discard that object irrespective of whether it is a 
significant  object  or  an  insignificant  object – only  that  is  called tyãg.  
On  the  other  hand,  if  a  person  can  outwardly  give  up  many  other 
things    but    cannot    discard    an    object    that    obstructs    him    in 
worshipping Bhagvãn, his tyãg is useless. 
 

GADHADÃ II 
- 566 - 
57.5 
“Also, do not think that only appealing objects obstruct a person’s 
worship  of Bhagvãn and  insignificant  objects  do  not.    After  all,  the 
very  nature  of  the jeev is  such  that  some  people  prefer  sweet  items, 
some  prefer  salty  items,  some  prefer  sour  items,  and  some  prefer 
bitter  items.    Therefore,  it  is  the  petty  mentality  of  the jeev that  it 
keeps  even  the  most  insignificant  objects  dearer  to  it  than Bhagvãn.  
However, when a person considers the greatness of Bhagvãn, no such 
object can compare to even a millionth of a fraction of His greatness. 
 
57.6 
“If  a  person  has  developed  love  for Bhagvãn having  thoroughly 
realised Bhagvãn in this way, he would not develop love towards any 
worldly  object,  such  as  the body,  and  the brahmãnd.    Instead,  all 
worldly  objects  would  become  insignificant  to  him.    After  all,  it  was 
when  Chitraketu  Rãjã  thoroughly  realised  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn 
that  he  abandoned  his  ten  million  wives.    He  even  abandoned  his 
empire,  which  spanned  across  the  entire  country.    He  ultimately 
realised, ‘Of what value is the pleasure of ten million women before the 
bliss  of  Bhagvãn?    Of  what  value  are  the  pleasures  of  an  empire 
spanning the entire country?  Of what value are the pleasures of the lok 
of Indra and the lok of Brahmã?’ 
 
57.7 
“In contrast, a person who has love for some objects other than such 
a  great Bhagvãn possesses  a  very  petty  mentality.    Just  as  a  dog 
deprives pleasure from taking a dry bone to some isolated place and 
then  licking  it,  in  the  same  way,  a  foolish  person  believes  that  there 
are   pleasures  in   such  miseries,   and   therefore  develops   love  for 
worthless  objects.    If  a bhakta of Bhagvãn does  have  more  love  for 
some  object  than  he  has  for Bhagvãn, then he is nothing but a ‘cat-
like’ (deceitful) bhakta.  On the other hand, a true bhakta of Bhagvãn 
would definitely not hold anything dearer to him than Bhagvãn.” 
 
57.8 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “A bhakta of Bhagvãn who possesses gnãn, 
vairãgya, bhakti, and dharma realises, ‘A person who is brave and who 
walks  boldly  towards  his  enemy  at  the  time  of  battle  is  indeed  truly 

GADHADÃ II 
- 567 - 
brave.    Conversely,  it  is  pointless  when  a  person  who  is  brave  is  not 
utilised  in  battle,  just  like  wealth  that  is  not  spent.    Similarly,  since  I 
have attained Bhagvãn, if I do not talk about kalyãn to those who keep 
my company, then of what use is my gnãn?’  Bearing  this  in  mind,  he 
would  not  have  any  cowardice  in  talking  about Bhagvãn – even  if 
some opposition were to arise regarding his preaching.” 
 
57.9 
Having  said this,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  requested  the  singing  of  three 
verses written by Tulsidãs: ‘Jãki Lagan Rãmso Nahi...’, ‘Ehi Kahyo Sunu 
Ved Chahu...’, and ‘Jãku Priya Na Rãm Vaidehi...’. 
 
57.10 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then added, “We should live according to the words 
mentioned   in   these   verses.      While   doing   so,   if   some   deficiency 
remains, and if a person were to die at that time, he will still not enter 
the cycle of births and deaths, nor will he become a ghost.  In fact, at 
the very worst, he will join the ranks of Indra or Brahma; his fate will 
not  be  any  worse  than  that.    Therefore,  a  person  should  fearlessly 
engage in the worship of Bhagvãn.” 
 
57.11 
At that point, Mulji Brahm-Chãri came to call Shreeji Mahãrãj for His 
meals, and they both left the sabhã together. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 57 || 190 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 58 
The Flourishing Of A Sampradãy 
 
58.1 
In  the Samvat year  1881,  on Shrãvan sud 4  [29
th
 July  1824],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress  with  a  large, 
cylindrical  pillow that  had  been  placed  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on 
the  veranda  outside  the  east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr 
in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of 
munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before Him. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 568 - 
58.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “How do the sampradãys of  the  great 
ãchãryas flourish for a long period of time?” 
 
58.3 
Muktãnand  Swãmi  answered,  “Firstly,  by  the shãstras of   the 
sampradãy;  secondly,  by  following  the dharma of a person’s varna 
and ãshram as  prescribed  in  the shãstras;  and  thirdly,  by  total  belief 
in  a  person’s ishta-dev.    A sampradãy flourishes  by  these  three 
factors.” 
 
58.4 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then asked the same question to Brahmãnand Swãmi 
and Nityãnand Swãmi.  They also gave the same reply. 
 
58.5 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Here, allow me to answer the question.  
A sampradãy flourishes  by  knowing  the  following:    The  purpose  for 
which  the ishta-dev of  the sampradãy took  birth  on  earth;  and  after 
taking birth, the various charitras He performed, as well as the ways 
in which He behaved.  Through His behaviour, dharma as well as the 
greatness  of  that ishta-dev is  naturally  revealed.    In  this  way,  a 
sampradãy is advanced by the shãstras which narrate the charitras of 
its ishta-dev from His birth up until His passing away.  Regardless of 
whether those shãstras are in Sanskrit or in a different language, only 
those shãstras will advance the sampradãy, not others. 
 
58.6 
“For example, those who worship Rãm Bhagvãn will be inspired only 
by  the  Vãlmiki  Rãmãyan  ;  and  those  who  worship Shree Krishna 
Bhagvãn will  be  inspired  only  by  the  tenth  and  eleventh skandhs of 
the Shreemad Bhãgvat.  The Veds will not inspire those who worship 
Rãm Bhagvãn or Shree Krishna Bhagvãn.  Ultimately, only the shãstras 
of a person’s own sampradãy will advance the sampradãy.” 
 
58.7 
Having  said  this,  “Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  commanded  Muktãnand 
Swãmi:  “You too should continuously preach and write shãstras 
related to your sampradãy and your ishta-dev for the rest of your life.  
This is my ãgnã to you for as long as you live.” 

GADHADÃ II 
- 569 - 
58.8 
With great respect for these words of Shreeji Mahãrãj, Muktãnand 
Swãmi promised to devoutly abide by them.  Then, folding his hands, 
he bowed before Shreeji Mahãrãj. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 58 || 191 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 59 
Bhagvãn And Sant Are Kalyãn-Kãri 
 
59.1 
In the Samvat year 1881, on Shrãvan sud 12 [6
th
 August 1824], Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on 
the  veranda  outside  the mandir of Shree Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in  Dãdã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from various places, 
had gathered before Him. 
 
59.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “In the four Veds, the Purãns, and the 
historical shãstras, there is one central principle, and that is that only 
Bhagvãn and  His sant can  grant kalyãn.    In  fact, Bhagvãn’s sant is 
greater  that  even Shiv, Brahmã,  and  the  other devs.    So,  when  a 
person attains Bhagvãn or His sant, apart from this, there is no other 
kalyãn for that jeev; this itself is ultimate kalyãn. 
 
59.3 
“Furthermore, only those who have accumulated a great number of 
rewards  from  performing  good  deeds  receive  the  opportunity  to 
serve Bhagvãn’s sant,  but  those  who  have  few  merits  do  not.    So,  a 
person should develop love for Bhagvãn’s sant just as he has love for 
his  wife,  son,  parents,  or  brother.    Then,  due  to  this  love,  the jeev 
becomes absolutely fulfilled. 
 
59.4 
“Moreover, even if a person’s wife, son, or other family members are 
unworthy;  and  even  if  they  are  dishonest  and  evil,  in  no  way  would 
he perceive avgun in them.  Conversely, even if the bhakta of Bhagvãn 

GADHADÃ II 
- 570 - 
possesses  every  noble  quality,  if  he  were  to  utter  even  a  few  harsh 
words, then a person would hold a grudge against him for as long as 
he  lives.    If  a  person  has  such  an  attitude,  then  in  no  way  can  he  be 
said  to  have  as  much  love  for  the bhaktas of Bhagvãn as  he  does  for 
his relatives.  As a result, he would not attain kalyãn. 
 
59.5 
“Furthermore, the greatness of the sant is  as  much  as  I  mentioned 
earlier.    Yet,  even  after  attaining Bhagvãn and  His sant,  some  people 
still  have  the  doubt, ‘Will I attain kalyãn or not?’  What  can  be  the 
reason  for  this?    Well,  in  his  past  lives,  that  person  had  not  attained 
Bhagvãn or His sant, and nor had he served them.  Therefore, this is a 
new  experience  for him, which  will  show  rewards in  his  subsequent 
lives.    On  the  other  hand,  if  a  person  had  attained Bhagvãn and  His 
sant and  had  served  them  in  his  past  lives,  then  in  this  life,  his  love 
for  the bhaktas of Bhagvãn would  never  diminish;  nor  would  he 
waver in his nishchay.  Even if his disturbing thoughts related to kãm, 
krodh, or lobh persisted, his nishchay in Bhagvãn would not dissolve.  
Then,  what  can  be  said  about  his nishchay not  faltering  due  to  some 
other person’s influence?  In fact, even if his own mind were to try to 
sway  him  from  his nishchay,  he  would  still  not  be  swayed.    Such  a 
person’s determination can be said to be like that of Nãth Bhakta, 
Vishnudãs,  Himrãj  Shah  and  Bhãlchandra  Sheth;  and  Kashidãs  and 
Dãmodar also had this determination.  When a person possesses such 
determination, it should be known that this person has been a bhakta 
of Bhagvãn in a past life.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 59 || 192 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 60 
Overcoming Difficulties When Performing The Bhakti Of 
Bhagvãn 
 
60.1 
In the Samvat year 1881, on Shrãvan vad 4 [13
th
 August 1824], Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  in 

GADHADÃ II 
- 571 - 
the eastern veranda outside the west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s 
darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  wearing  a  white khes and  had  tied  a 
white pãgh around  His  head.    He  had  also  covered  Himself  with  a 
thin, white cloth.  A sabhã of paramhans, as well as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
60.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj requested, “Please begin a question-answer 
discussion.” 
 
60.3 
Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, life is full of difficulties.  
Amidst  all  these  difficulties,  what  understanding  should  a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn develop in order to remain happy at heart?” 
 
60.4 
Shreeji Mahãrãj began, “To answer that, I shall tell you about my own 
experience.”  He then explained, “By keeping the following three 
forms   of   awareness,   I   am   not   obstructed   by   any   disturbances:  
constant awareness of the ãtmã, which is distinct from the body; the 
awareness  of  the  perishable  nature  of  all  worldly objects;  and  the 
awareness  of Bhagvãn’s greatness.    By  keeping  these  three  forms  of 
awareness, no difficulties obstruct me in any way. 
 
60.5 
“However, if a person does encounter some difficulties, then due to 
the nature of the chitt, it may appear that there is some disturbance.  
However,  the  effect  of  that  disturbance  does  not  penetrate  into  the 
chaitanya.    This  can  be  realised  by  the  fact  that  a  person  never 
experiences  disturbances  that  are  occurring  externally  when  he  is 
dreaming.    On  the  other  hand,  if  a  disturbance  has  penetrated  into 
the chaitanya,  it  is  experienced  in  all  three  mental  states  (jãgrat, 
svapna,  and sushupti).    Therefore,  because  I  do  not  experience  any 
disturbances  in  my  dreams,  it  can  be  assumed  that  no  disturbances 
have affected my chaitanya in any way. 
 
60.6 
“Having said this, if a bhakta of Bhagvãn encounters  some  sort  of 
distressing hardship, it is not as if I do not realise it;  I very much do 

GADHADÃ II 
- 572 - 
feel it in my heart.  Only a vimukh like Raghunãth-Dãs would not feel 
it.    When  Rãmãnand Swãmi  left  his  body,  all  the satsangis began  to 
cry,  but  Raghunãth-Dãs  was  not  at  all  upset.    Instead,  he  wandered 
around, laughing and talking to others.  Therefore, only an outcast or 
a vimukh would  not  feel  hurt  when  a bhakta of Bhagvãn encounters 
some sort  of  misery;  but  a bhakta of Bhagvãn would  definitely 
become distressed by the suffering of other bhaktas.” 
 
60.7 
Continuing, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “The shãstras state  that  if  a bhakta 
of Bhagvãn is  being  killed  or  harassed  by  someone,  then  a  person 
who  stands  in  defence  of  that bhakta of Bhagvãn – and  in  doing  so 
dies  or  becomes  wounded  himself – is  totally  freed  from  the  five 
great  sins.    Such  is  the  glory  of  defending  a bhakta of Bhagvãn.  
However, if a person is hurt by the words of the bhaktas of Bhagvãn – 
as if he has  been shot in  the  heart  by some  arrows – and if  a  grudge 
develops from that hatred to such an extent that it is not resolved as 
long as he lives, then such a person is like an outcast.  Even if such a 
person possesses qualities such as dharma and tyãg, or performs tap, 
it  is  all  worthless.    In  fact,  even  if  he  performs  a  million  other 
activities, his jeev will not attain kalyãn. 
 
60.8 
“In society, if a woman has equal love for her husband as she does for 
another  man,  then  she  is  looked upon  as  being  immoral – like  a 
prostitute.  Similarly, if a person in this world believes, ‘As far as I am 
concerned, all sãdhus are equal.  Who is good and who is bad?’,  then 
even if he is considered to be a satsangi, he should be known to be a 
vimukh.   In  addition,  in  case  a  person  feels, ‘If  I  say  something 
inappropriate, my own friends will criticise me,’ he listens as someone 
speaks  unkindly  of  a bhakta of Bhagvãn in  order  to  preserve  his 
respect.    He  should  also  be  known  to  be  a vimukh,  even  though  he 
may be considered to be a satsangi. 
 
60.9 
“Therefore,  a  person  should  be  absolutely  loyal  to  a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn – just  as  he  is  loyal  to  his  relatives  and  his  mother  and 
father.    If  ever  some  sort  of  difficulty  does  happen  to  arise  with  a 

GADHADÃ II 
- 573 - 
bhakta of Bhagvãn, only a person who does not develop a grudge, but 
settles  the  difference  and  reunites  with  that bhakta – like  a  line 
drawn in water – can be called a true bhakta of Bhagvãn.” 
 
60.10 
Having  said  this,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  finally  added,  “I  am  very 
compassionate – like Dattãtrey, Jadbharat, Nãrad, and Shukji.  In fact, 
once while I was travelling in the east, I came across a group of tyãgis.  
They  ordered me:   ‘Go and pick some green spinach’.   I  replied, ‘I will 
not pick it, because it too contains a jeev’.   Hearing  this,  one  of  them 
drew  a  sword  and  threatened  me.    Nevertheless,  I  did  not  pick  the 
spinach.  This is the extent of my compassionate nature.  However, if 
a  person  looks  angrily  at  a bhakta of Bhagvãn,  then  even  if  that 
person is  a  relative  of mine, I  feel  like  tearing  his eyes  out;  and  if he 
should hurt a bhakta of Bhagvãn with his hands, I feel like cutting his 
hands off.  Such is the hatred I experience; and in those cases, I do not 
show  any  compassion.    Only  a  person  who  has  such  loyalty  for  a 
bhakta of Bhagvãn can be called a complete bhakta of Bhagvãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 60 || 193 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 61 
Niyams, Nishchay In Bhagvãn, And Loyalty 
 
61.1 
In the Samvat year 1881, on Shrãvan vad 7 [17
th
 August 1825], Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  in 
the eastern veranda outside the west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s 
darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  had  tied  a  golden-bordered,  white shelu 
around  His  head  and  had  covered  Himself  with  another  white shelu.  
He was also wearing a white khes and a garland of mogrã flowers.  A 
sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had 
gathered before Him. 
 
61.2 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “A  person  who  possesses  three 
characteristics  can  be  called  a  firm satsangi.    What  are  these  three 

GADHADÃ II 
- 574 - 
characteristics?    The  first  is  to  strictly  follow  the niyams prescribed 
by  his ishta-dev – to  such  an  extent  that  he  would  never abandon 
those niyams even  at  the  cost  of  his  life.    The  second  is  to  have 
extremely firm nishchay in Bhagvãn, so much so that he would never 
diverge  from  it  even  if  others  or  his  own  mind  was  to  raise  doubts.  
The third is to be loyal to those Vaishnav bhaktas who worship their 
ishta-dev – just as parents are loyal to their children, a son is loyal to 
his   father,   and   a   wife  is   loyal   to   her   husband.      A   person   who 
possesses these three characteristics completely can be called a firm 
satsangi.” 
 
61.3 
Then continuing, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “When someone comes and 
sits at the front of a sabhã of bhaktas, others think, ‘This person must 
be a great satsangi’.    However,  the  test  of  a  great satsangi is  as 
follows:    If  he  is  a grahastha,  he  would  surrender  everything  he  has 
for Bhagvãn and His bhaktas; and if required to do so, he would even 
give  his  life  for satsang;  and  the  moment  his ishta-dev gives  an ãgnã 
for him  to  become  a paramhans,  he  would  immediately  become  a 
paramhans.    If  a bhakta of Bhagvãn possesses  these  characteristics, 
then whether he sits at the front of a sabhã of bhaktas, or at the back, 
he should be considered to be great amongst all bhaktas.  Moreover, a 
tyãgi who remains unaffected and continues to firmly follow all of his 
niyams,  despite  encountering  wealth  and  women  in  his  travels  to 
other regions, is considered to be great amongst all tyãgis. 
 
61.4 
“If a person with rajo-gun,  who  is  considered  to  be  reputable  in 
society,  comes  to  a sabhã,  then  he  should  be  respected  accordingly 
and given a seat at the very front of the sabhã.  Such etiquette should 
be observed by those possessing gnãn, as well as by tyãgis.  If they do 
not, then the consequences can be harmful.  Consider the example of 
when Parikshit Rãjã went to the rushi’s ãshram.  The rushi happened 
to  be  in samãdhi and  so  the  king  was  not  honoured.    As  a  result,  the 
king  became  angry  and  threw  a  dead  snake  around  the rushi’s neck.  
Then,  the rushi’s son cursed the king, leading to the king’s death 
seven days later. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 575 - 
61.5 
“There is also the example of when Daksh prajãpati visited Brahma’s 
sabhã.    There,  Shivji  neither  stood  up  for  Daksh,  nor  welcomed  him 
verbally;  therefore  upsetting  Daksh.   He  then cancelled Shivji’s share 
in  the yagna he  performed.    Then, Nandishvar and  Bhrugu  Rushi 
cursed each other; because of that sin, Sati burnt to death in Daksh’s 
sacrifice.  This prompted Virbhadra to cut off Daksh’s head and offer 
it in the fire, which resulted in Daksh receiving the head of a goat. 
 
61.6 
“Therefore, all of you grahasthas and tyãgis should  abide  by  the 
following:  Those who are considered to be respectable in society and 
worldly  affairs  should  in  no  way  be  insulted  in  a sabhã.    If  they  are 
dishonoured,    it    will    definitely    lead    to    problems    and    create 
obstructions in worship.  For this reason, all satsangi grahasthas and 
tyãgis should firmly abide by this principle of mine.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 61 || 194 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 62 
Ãtmã-Nishthã, Pati-Vratã, And Sevã 
 
62.1 
In  the Samvat year  1881,  on Mãgshar sud 2  [22
nd
 November  1824], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  north-facing  rooms  of  Dãdã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was wearing a white khes and had 
tied  a  white pãgh around  His  head.   Also,  He  had  covered  Himself 
with  a  white chofãl.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
62.2 
 Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  summoned  His  nephews,  Ayodhyãprasãdji  and 
Raghuvirji, and said to them, “You may ask me questions.” 
 
62.3 
Then, Ayodhyãprasãdji first asked, “In life, a man may be engrossed 
in  the  entanglements  of  worldly  affairs  all  day  long,  and  during  that 
time,  he  may  well  perform  some  moral  as  well  as  immoral karmas.  

GADHADÃ II 
- 576 - 
Moreover,  he  may  engage  in  worship for  only  half  an  hour  or  so.    Is 
this  enough  to  burn  all of  the  sins  he  has committed  during  the  day, 
or not?  That is my question?” 
 
62.4 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Even if a person has spent the whole day in 
pravrutti,  and  regardless  of  whatever  type  of  activities  he  may  have 
been  involved  in,  when  he  engages  in  the  worship  of Bhagvãn,  if  his 
indriyas, antah-karans,  and jeev all  unite  and  become  engrossed  in 
worship,  then  even  if  he  does  so  for  half  an  hour,  or  even  for  a  few 
minutes, all of his sins will be burnt to ashes.  However, if his indriyas, 
antah-karans,  and jeev do  not  unite  and  engage  in  worship,  then  his 
sins cannot be burned by worshipping for such a short while.  Such a 
person  can  attain kalyãn only  by  the  grace  of Bhagvãn.    This  is  the 
answer to your question.” 
 
62.5 
Next, Raghuvirji asked a question, “Mahãrãj, what must a person do 
for the moksh of the jeev?” 
 
62.6 
Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “If a person seeks kalyãn, he should place 
his  body,  wealth,  home,  family,  and  relations  in  the sevã of Bhagvãn.  
Furthermore, he should avoid any object that may not be of use in the 
sevã of Bhagvãn.    A  person  who  lives  a  life  centred  around Bhagvãn 
joins  the  ranks  of Nãrad and  the Sanakãdik in  the dhãm of Bhagvãn 
and  attains  ultimate moksh after  he  dies,  even  if  he  is  a grahastha.  
This is the answer to your question.” 
 
62.7 
Having answered their questions, Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Since 
the day I began thinking about it, I have noticed that there are three 
strengths  which  lead  to kalyãn and  which  lead  to  extreme  bliss.    Of 
these,  the  first  is  the  strength  of  intense ãtmã-nishthã,  which  is  to 
believe a person’s true self to be the ãtmã and  engage  in  worship  of 
Bhagvãn,  like  Shukji.    The  second  is  like  the  strength  of pati-vratã, 
which is to worship Bhagvãn as if He is his husband, just as the gopis 
did.  The third is the strength of sevã, which is to worship Bhagvãn as 

GADHADÃ II 
- 577 - 
His dãs,  just  like Hanumãnji and  Uddhavji.    Without  these  three 
strengths, there is no way in which the jeev can attain kalyãn.  In fact, 
I, myself have firmly developed all three of these strengths.  Even if a 
person   possesses   one   of   these   strengths   firmly,   he   becomes 
absolutely fulfilled. 
 
62.8 
“I shall now describe the characteristics of these three strengths 
individually.  Firstly, the following are the characteristics of a person 
who has realised the ãtmã.  On one side there is the ãtmã and on the 
other  side  is  the  crowd  of Mãyã – the  body,  the indriyas,  the antah-
karans,  the  three gun,  and  the panch-vishays.   The thought  that  rests 
between the two is full of gnãn.  This thought remains steady, just as 
the  tip  of  a  flame  remains  steady  in  the  absence  of  wind.    It  is  this 
thought  which  prevents  the  body, indriyas,  and antah-karans from 
becoming one with the ãtmã.  In fact, even the thought itself does not 
become one with the ãtmã. 
 
62.9 
“When the jeev attains this thought, its vruttis, which once reached all 
the  way  to  Kãshi,  recede  to  reach  only  as  far  as  Vadtãl.    When  that 
thought is strengthened, the vruttis then recede from Vadtãl to reach 
only as far as Gadhadã.  Then, from reaching as far as Gadhadã, they 
recede  and  come  into  the  vicinity  of  the  body.    From  the  body,  the 
vruttis recede further and rest in the organs of the indriyas.  From the 
organs of the indriyas, the vruttis of the indriyas turn inward towards 
the antah-karans.  Finally, the vruttis of the indriyas and antah-karans 
become  absorbed  in  the ãtmã.    It  is  then  that  the jeev’s kãran body, 
which is full of worldly desires, is said to be destroyed. 
 
62.10 
“Furthermore, when this thought meets with the ãtmã, divine light is 
generated in  the heart  of the  thinker,  and he  understands  himself  as 
being brahm-rup.  In addition, he also has the realisation of Parbrahm 
Nãrãyan,  who  resides  within  that brahm.    A  person  who  has  this 
realisation  feels, ‘I am the ãtmã, and Paramãtmã eternally resides 
within me’.    Such  a  sustained  state  is  the  highest  level  of ãtmã-
nishthã. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 578 - 
 
62.11 
“Secondly, the strength of a person with pati-vratã should be like that 
of the gopis of Vraj.  For example, from the day the gopis touched the 
holy  feet  of Shree Krishna Bhagvãn,  all  the  pleasures  of  this  world 
became  like  poison  to  them.    In  this  way,  if  a pati-vratã wife  sees  a 
man who is as handsome as Indra, or who is like a dev or some king, 
then  she  would  withdraw  her  eyes,  just  as  when  a  person  sees  a 
rotting  dog  or  some  faeces  and  becomes  extremely  disgusted  and 
looks  away.    This  is  the  highest  level  of pati-vratã.    Therefore,  if  a 
person  attaches  his vruttis to Bhagvãn just  as  a pati-vratã wife  does 
with  her  husband,  his  mind  would  never  become  pleased  upon 
seeing anyone else. 
 
62.12 
“Thirdly, a person who has a strength of offering bhakti with sevã 
would  like  the darshan only  of  his ishta-dev;  he  would  like  to  hear 
talks  only  about  Him;  he  would  like  His ishtadev’s nature;  and  he 
would  also  prefer  to  stay  only  with  Him.    However,  even  though  he 
has  such  love,  for  the  sake  of  serving  his ishta-dev and  earning  His 
pleasure,  he  wishes  day  and  night, ‘If my ishta-dev  were  to  command 
me, I would follow that command most happily’.  If his ishta-dev was to 
give a command that would force him to stay far away, he would stay 
there  happily,  but  in  no  way  would  he  be  disheartened.    In  fact,  he 
finds  supreme  bliss  in  following  the  command  itself.    This  is  the 
highest level of sevã.  Today, Gopãlãnand Swãmi and also Muktãnand 
Swãmi have the strength of offering bhakti with sevã. 
 
62.13 
“Among the bhaktas of Bhagvãn who  possess  one  of  these  three 
strengths,  there  are  three  levels – uttam, madhyam, and kanishth.  
Those  who  are  not  found  in  any  one  of  these  categories  can  only  be 
called wretched.  Therefore, it is only proper to die after a person has 
thoroughly developed one of the three strengths; it is not appropriate 
to die if a person has not completely developed any single one of the 
three.  Instead, it would be better if a person lives five days longer to 
dispel  his  misunderstandings  and  strengthen  at  least  one  of  these 
three inclinations, and then die.” 

GADHADÃ II 
- 579 - 
62.14 
Continuing,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  added, “The nature of the jeev is  such 
that  when  a  person  is  a grahastha,  he  would  prefer  to  abandon 
worldly life; but once he has abandoned the world, he has desires for 
the pleasures of worldly life once again.  This is the rebellious nature 
of  the jeev.    Therefore,  a  person  who  is  a  firm bhakta of Bhagvãn 
should worship Bhagvãn after discarding such a rebellious nature as 
well  as  all  of  his  personal  likes  and  dislikes.    Moreover,  it  is  only 
appropriate  to  die  after  eradicating  all  desires  other  than  those  of 
Bhagvãn. 
 
62.15 
“However, if a person does not have intense love for Bhagvãn,  he 
should  strengthen  only ãtmã-nishthã by  thought.    This  is  because  a 
bhakta of Bhagvãn should   either   possess   firm ãtmã-nishthã or 
extremely deep love for Bhagvãn.  If a person is not firm in either one 
of  these  two  strengths,  he  should strictly  abide  by  the niyams of  this 
satsang.  Only then will he be able to remain a satsangi; otherwise he 
will fall from satsang. 
 
62.16 
“When a bhakta of Bhagvãn experiences  difficulties  of  any kind,  it 
should be known that the source of those miseries is not Kãl, karma, 
or Mãyã.  In actual fact, it is Bhagvãn Himself who inspires difficulties 
to fall upon His bhaktas in order to test their patience.  Then, just as a 
man hides behind a curtain and watches, Bhagvãn hides in the heart 
of His bhakta and from there He observes the bhakta’s patience.  Also 
who  are Kãl, karma,  and Mãyã that  they  could  harm  a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn?    So,  realising  it  to  be Bhagvãn’s wish,  a bhakta of Bhagvãn 
should remain cheerful.” 
 
62.17 
Upon hearing this, Muktãnand Swãmi asked a question:  “Mahãrãj, 
the  talk  in  which  you  have  just  described  the  three  strengths is  very 
subtle and difficult to put into practice.  Only a few can understand it 
and  only  a  few  can  actually  live  by  it;  not  everyone  can  do  so.  
However,  there  are hundreds of  thousands  of  people  in satsang,  and 
it  would  be  difficult  for  all  of  them  to  understand  this  principle.    So, 
how can they progress?” 

GADHADÃ II 
- 580 - 
62.18 
Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “If a person behaves as a dãs of the dãs of 
a bhakta who  possesses  one  of  these  three  strengths,  and  if  he  also 
follows  his ãgnã,  then  despite  not  understanding  anything  else,  he 
would certainly become a pãrshad of Bhagvãn after this very life, and 
would therefore become fulfilled. 
 
62.19 
“In this world, the glory of Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas is  indeed  very 
great.    After  all,  no  matter  how  sinful  or  insignificant  a  person  may 
be, if he seeks the refuge of Bhagvãn and His bhaktas, that person will 
become absolutely fulfilled.  Such is the greatness of Bhagvãn and His 
bhaktas.    Therefore,  a  person  who  has  received  the  opportunity  to 
serve the bhaktas of Bhagvãn’s should remain fearless.” 
 
62.20 
Finally, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “I have delivered this talk about the 
three strengths  mainly  for  the  sake  of  Muktãnand  Swãmi  because  I 
have a great deal of love for him.  So, bearing in mind that Muktãnand 
Swãmi  is  suffering  from  an  illness,  I  spoke  today  to  be  sure  that  no 
form of deficiency remains in his understanding.” 
 
62.21 
In  reply,  Muktãnand  Swãmi  said,  “Mahãrãj,  I  also  felt  that  you 
delivered this talk for me.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 62 || 195 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 63 
Gaining Strength After Performing Sevã 
 
63.1 
In  the Samvat year  1881,  on Mãgshar vad 2  [8
th
 December  1824], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   in   His   place   of 
residence in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed 
entirely  in  white  clothes.    Bhajanãnand  Swãmi  was  reading  the 
Shreemad Bhãgvat before Shreeji Mahãrãj, and a sabhã of paramhans, 
as well as haribhaktas from various places, had also gathered before 
Him. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 581 - 
63.2 
Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “The thought which rests between 
the drashtã and   the drashya keeps   the drashtã and drashya 
separated.    In  this,  what  should  be  understood  as  the  consciousness 
of  the jeev and  what  should  be  understood  as  the  consciousness  of 
the antah-karans?” 
 
63.3 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “It seems to me that if a person’s jeev has 
become  extremely  powerful,  then  the vruttis of  his antah-karans are 
in the vruttis of  his jeev.    These vruttis seem  to  be  divided  into  four 
categories,  according  to  the  four  respective  functions  of  the antah-
karans.  Therefore, the awareness in the indriyas and antah-karans is 
that  of  the jeev itself.    Therefore,  the jeev allows  the indriyas and 
antah-karans to apply themselves wherever it is appropriate to do so 
and    restricts    them    from    doing    as    they    please    where    it    is 
inappropriate to do so.  In fact, if a person’s jeev has  become  very 
powerful,  he  would  not  even  have  impure dreams.    On  the  other 
hand, if a person’s jeev is  lacking  in  strength,  then  he  should  follow 
the principle of Sãnkhya and behave only as the ãtmã (drashtã); but, 
a person should not associate with his indriyas and antah-karans.  By 
behaving as the ãtmã in this way, his jeev gains great strength. 
 
63.4 
“However, there is an even greater method than this to gain strength.  
If  a  person  has  love  for Bhagvãn and  His sant,  possesses  intense 
shraddhã in  serving  them,  and  also  engages  in  the  nine  types  of 
bhakti,  then  his jeev will  instantly  gain  strength.    Therefore,  for 
making  the jeev stronger,  there  is  no  method  comparable  to  that  of 
serving Bhagvãn and His bhaktas. 
 
63.5 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “I shall now tell you a personal principle of 
mine.  When I became ill in the year of Samvat 1869, I saw Kailãs and 
Vaikunth,  and  I  also  saw  myself  riding  on Nandishvar and  riding  on 
Garud.  However, I did not find any pleasure in those powers.  Then, I 
began  to  behave  only  as  the ãtmã,  at  which  point  all  disturbances 
decreased.    However,  then  I  thought, ‘Much better than behaving as 

GADHADÃ II 
- 582 - 
the ãtmã is to stay within the company of Bhagvãn and His bhaktas’.  I 
then become afraid, ‘What if by behaving as the ãtmã, I cannot return 
to  this  body  again?’  Therefore,   to   stay   within   the   company   of 
Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas and  to  be  able  to  serve  them in  whichever 
way possible, is indeed the very best spiritual activity.” 
 
63.6 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj explained, “Countless types of mental and 
physical suffering arise during the final moments of a person’s life.  
But, when a person has the darshan of Bhagvãn and His sant, all those 
miseries  are  expelled.    This  is  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn and  His 
bhaktas.    In  actual  fact,  the bhaktas of Bhagvãn are  indeed  nothing 
but  a murti of brahm.    That  is  why  a  person  should  never  perceive 
human traits in them. 
 
63.7 
“In addition, with the bhaktas of Bhagvãn a person should behave in 
the  same  way  as  family  members do  amongst  themselves.    For 
example,  even  if  a  person  lectures  his  own  family  members  out  of 
love, or if they happen to lecture him, grudges still do not develop in 
their hearts.  With bhaktas of Bhagvãn, a person should behave in the 
same way.  On the other hand, if a person does develop a grudge with 
Bhagvãn or His bhaktas, I do not even like to look at him.  In fact, my 
anger  with  such  a  person  never  subsides.    Moreover,  those  in  this 
world who commit the five great sins can still be redeemed someday, 
whereas  a  person  who  spites bhaktas of Bhagvãn can  never  be 
redeemed. 
 
63.8 
“Therefore, there is no reward greater than that of serving bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn,  and  there  is  no  sin  greater  than  that  of  spiting bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn.    Therefore,  if  a  person  wishes  to  make  his jeev powerful, 
then  he should sincerely  serve Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas by  thought, 
word, and deed.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 63 || 196 || 
 

GADHADÃ II 
- 583 - 
Gadhadã II – 64 
Purushottam Bhagvãn Is The Cause Of All Avatãrs 
 
64.1 
In the Samvat year 1881, on Posh sud 7 [27
th
 December 1824], Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress  with  a  large, 
cylindrical  pillow  that  had  been  placed  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on 
the  veranda  outside  the mandir of Shree  Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in  Dãdã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from various places, 
had gathered before Him. 
 
64.2 
Then, Svayamprakãshãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, are all avatãrs 
of Bhagvãn equal, or are there distinctions among them?” 
 
64.3 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  explained,  “After  listening  to  and  analytically 
thinking about all the shãstras written by Vyãsji, the conclusion I have 
reached  regarding  the avatãrs of Bhagvãn,  such  as Matsya, Kurma, 
Varãh,  and Nrusinh,  is  that Shree Krishna Bhagvãn is  the  source  of 
them  all.    That  is  to  say, Shree Krishna Bhagvãn is  not  an avatãr like 
the  other avatãrs,  but is Himself  the source  of  all avatãrs.    That  very 
Shree Krishna Bhagvãn is  our ishta-dev.  His divya charitras are 
narrated in the tenth skandh of the Shreemad Bhãgvat Purãn.  I have 
also considered it as a great authority in our Uddhav Sampradãy. 
 
64.4 
“As all other avatãrs are  also  of Shree Krishna Bhagvãn,  we  should 
respect  those avatãrs and  all shãstras which  describe  those avatãrs.  
Nevertheless,   we   should   primarily   respect   only Shree Krishna 
Bhagvãn and the shãstras which describe Him.” 
 
64.5 
Then, Purushottam Bhatt asked a question, “Bhagvãn created  this 
world for the kalyãn of the jeevs.  But, would it not have been possible 
for Bhagvãn, without creating this world, to grant kalyãn to the jeevs 
while  they  were  dormant  in  the  womb  of Mãyã?    Instead,  why  does 
He  take  the  trouble  of  creating  this  whole  world?    That  is  the 
question.” 

GADHADÃ II 
- 584 - 
64.6 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Bhagvãn Shree Krishna Purushottam is  the 
supreme ruler and is eternal.  He is forever present on His sinhãsan in 
His Akshardhãm.    Countless  millions  of brahmãnds reside  within  the 
refuge  of  that Akshardhãm.    For  example,  a  king  who  rules  over  the 
whole  world  owns  innumerable  villages;  and  of  those,  if  one  or  two 
were  to  become  deserted,  or  if  one  or  two  became  populated,  he 
would  not  even  take  notice.    Similarly, Shree Krishna Bhagvãn is  the 
lord  of  countless  millions  of brahmãnds.    However,  the brahmãnds 
are not destroyed all at once.  Therefore, if one or two brahmãnds are 
destroyed, Bhagvãn would not even take note of it. 
 
64.7 
“In addition, the birth of that Shree Krishna Bhagvãn from Devki is 
only for the sake of narration, because in actual fact, He is forever 
beyond birth. 
 
64.8 
“Furthermore, the Akshardhãm of Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn is  beyond 
Prakruti and Purush by   its vyatirek nature,   and   it   pervades 
everywhere by its anvay nature – just as ãkãsh is present everywhere 
by  its anvay nature,  and  is  beyond  the  four bhuts by  its vyatirek 
nature.  This is Shree Krishna Bhagvãn’s Akshardhãm. 
 
64.9 
“Moreover, Shree Krishna Bhagvãn forever  dwells  within  that dhãm.  
However,   despite   being present   in Akshardhãm,   He   also   grants 
darshan to   whomever,   wherever,   and   in   whichever   way   it   is 
necessary.    He  speaks  to  whomever  it  is  necessary  to  speak  to,  and 
even  touches  whomever  it  is  necessary  to  touch.    Just  as  a  person 
who  has  attained siddh-dashã can  see  for  thousands  of  miles  while 
remaining in one place, and hear talks from thousands of miles away, 
similarly,  despite  being  in  His Akshardhãm, Bhagvãn also  reveals 
Himself  in  the  countless  millions  of brahmãnds wherever  there  is  a 
need to be revealed.  Nevertheless, He Himself is still always present 
in  His Akshardhãm.    The  fact  that  He  remains  in  one  place  and  yet 
reveals   himself   in   countless   places   is   a   demonstration   of   his 
extraordinary   powers – just   as   during   the rãs-leelã,   when   He 

GADHADÃ II 
- 585 - 
assumed as many svarups as there were gopis.  This use of Bhagvãn’s 
extraordinary powers to remain in one place and at the same time to 
appear  in  countless  places  is  itself  His  pervasive svarup.    However, 
unlike ãkãsh, he does not pervade without possessing a svarup. 
 
64.10 
“Moreover,  by  the  extraordinary  powers  of Bhagvãn,   the   five 
hundred  million yojan surface  of  the pruthvi becomes  the  size  of  a 
sub-atomic  particle  at  the  time  of  destruction.    Then,  at  the  time  of 
creation,  from  being  sub-atomic  in  size,  the pruthvi again  becomes 
five hundred million yojans large.  Also, thunder, lightning, and dense 
clouds  of  rain  appear  in  the  monsoon  season.    These  and  all  other 
such wonders are all due to the extraordinary powers of Bhagvãn. 
 
64.11
 “That Shree Krishna Bhagvãn is   worthy   to   be   worshipped   by   a 
mumukshu in  every  way.    While  the  other avatãrs possessed  the 
greatness   of  maybe  one   or   two   powers, Shree Krishna Bhagvãn 
possesses  all  powers.    After  all, Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn is  not  only 
rasik,  He is  also  a tyãgi; He  possesses gnãn and  is  also  the sovereign 
ruler; He is a coward as well as brave; He is extremely compassionate 
and is a master of all extraordinary powers; and He is very strong as 
well  as  very  deceptive.    In  this  respect,  only Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn 
possesses all powers. 
 
64.12 
“It  is  in Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn’s Akshardhãm that  the  countless 
millions  of brahmãnds are  supported  forever.    Of  those,  when  the 
hundred   year   lifespan   (the   lifespan   of Brahmã)   of   a   particular 
brahmãnd ends,  that brahmãnd is  destroyed.    From  this,  it  is  clear 
that  not  all brahmãnds are  destroyed  as  the  same  time.    So,  if  other 
brahmãnds are  still  present  at  the  time  of  destruction,  why  should 
Bhagvãn grant kalyãn to the jeevs at that time?  This is the answer to 
the question.” 
 
64.13 
In    this    way,    Shreeji    Mahãrãj    indirectly    revealed    Himself    as 
Purushottam.    Upon  hearing  this,  all  the bhaktas realised  that  the 

GADHADÃ II 
- 586 - 
same Shree Krishna Purushottam is in actual fact Shreeji Mahãrãj, the 
son of Dharma and Bhakti. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 64 || 197 || 
 
 
Gadhadã II – 65 
The Darshan Of The Murti Of Bhagvãn 
The Over-Wise 
 
65.1 
In  the Samvat year  1881,  on Posh sud 11  [1
st
 January  1825],  Swãmi 
Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a decorated bedstead near 
the mandir of Shree Vãsudev-Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Gadhadã.  He was dressed entirely in white clothes.  A sabhã of munis, 
as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
65.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Please listen, as I wish to speak about 
Bhagvãn.” 
 
65.3 
The sãdhus,  who  were  singing kirtans to  the  accompaniment  of  a 
pakhvãj,  stopped  singing.    They  then  folded  their  hands  and  settled 
down to listen. 
 
65.4 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj began, “When Bhagvãn takes birth on earth for 
the kalyãn of  the jeevs as  an avatãr,  such  as Rãm and Krishna,  He  is 
not infatuated by anything in this world, which is the result of Mãyã.  
In  fact,  due  to  His alokik majesty,  He  behaves  absolutely  fearlessly.  
However, for the sake of accepting the bhakti of His bhaktas, He also 
thoroughly indulges in the panch-vishays.  Seeing this, those people in 
the world who are over-wise, perceive faults in Bhagvãn.  They think, 
‘He may be called Bhagvãn, but He has more attachment to this world 
than we do’.   Thinking  this,  they consider Bhagvãn to  be human,  just 
like themselves, but they do not realise His alokik greatness.  This in 
itself is Bhagvãn’s Mãyã. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 587 - 
65.5 
“In fact, even a sãdhu who  has  realised  the ãtmã and  has  become 
brahm-rup is not infatuated upon seeing any object of this world.  So, 
what  is  surprising  about Shree Krishna Bhagvãn – who  is Parbrahm, 
and  who  is  greater  than Brahm – being  able  to  remain  uninfluenced 
by Mãyã and the result of Mãyã?  He certainly can.” 
 
65.6 
Having said this, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “A sãdhu who  has  attained 
ãtmã-nishthã also  possesses  intense vairãgya.    Due  to  both  of  these 
qualities,   he   will   not   become   attached   to   anything   in   any   way.  
However, if he does not possess bhakti towards Bhagvãn, it is as good 
as preparing many different types of food dishes but not adding salt; 
all  would  be  tasteless.    In  the  same  way,  without  the bhakti of 
Bhagvãn, ãtmã-nishthã and vairãgya alone  are  simply  useless;  a 
person can never attain kalyãn through them. 
 
65.7 
“Realising this, Shukji studied the Shreemad Bhãgvat and offered 
great bhakti to Shree Krishna Bhagvãn,   despite   having   already 
become brahm-svarup.  Therefore, it is a great deficiency of a person 
who has ãtmã-nishthã to not have bhakti towards Bhagvãn. 
 
65.8 
“In the same way, if a person has bhakti towards Bhagvãn,  but  does 
not  have ãtmã-nishthã and vairãgya,  then  just  as  a  person  has  love 
towards Bhagvãn,  he  will  also  develop  love  towards  other  things.  
Therefore,  this  is  a  major  deficiency  for  those following  the  path  of 
bhakti. 
 
65.9 
“Now, a perfect bhakta of Bhagvãn has thoroughly realised Bhagvãn’s 
greatness;  so,  everything  except Bhagvãn seems  worthless  to  him.  
That  is  why  he  is  not  infatuated  by  anything.    Therefore,  when  a 
person  possesses  all  three  qualities  of ãtmã-nishthã, vairãgya,  and 
bhakti towards Bhagvãn,  he  can  be  said  to  have  no  deficiencies 
whatsoever.    Such  a  person  is  called  a bhakta with gnãn,  an ekãntik 
bhakta, and a loyal bhakta of Bhagvãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 65 || 198 || 

GADHADÃ II 
- 588 - 
Gadhadã II – 66 
A Person Cannot Recognise His Own Avgun 
A Red-Hot Iron Ball 
 
66.1 
In  the Samvat year  1881,  on Posh vad 1  [5
th
 January  1825],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress  with  a  large, 
cylindrical  pillow  that  had  been  placed  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on 
the  veranda  outside  the  east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr 
in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in white  clothes.    Garlands  of 
yellow  flowers  and  red guldãvadi flowers  were  hanging  around  His 
neck,  and  a  tassel  of  yellow  flowers  decorated  His pãgh.    A sabhã of 
munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before Him in a sabhã.  Some of the sãdhus were singing a vishnupad 
to the accompaniment of a sarodã and dukad. 
 
66.2
 After the kirtans had finished, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Today, I wish to 
ask  all  the  senior sãdhus some questions.”  Having said this, He 
directed His first question to Ãnandãnand Swãmi.  He said, “Suppose 
there is a person who recognises his own faults and does not look at 
the avgun of other bhaktas, despite having little intelligence; instead, 
he  looks  only  at  their gun.    On  the  other  hand,  suppose  there  is 
another  person  who  is  very  intelligent,  but  he  does  not  see  his  own 
avgun.    Moreover,  he  overlooks  the gun of  other bhaktas and  looks 
only  at  their avgun.   Why  is  it  that  the  person  with  little  intelligence 
finds avgun in  himself,  whereas  the  person  with  much  intelligence 
cannot realise his own avgun?  That is the question.” 
 
66.3 
Ãnãnd Swãmi answered to the bet of his ability, but he was unable to 
give a satisfactory reply. 
 
66.4 
So, Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “The answer to that is as follows:  It is 
because  that  person  has  offended  some  great bhakta of Bhagvãn 
either in this life or in a past life.  As a result of that sin, his intellect 
has  become  corrupted.    That  is  why  he  perceives avgun in bhaktas 
without  being  able  to  realise avgun in  himself.    This  is  the  only 
answer to that question.” 

GADHADÃ II 
- 589 - 
66.5 
Next, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked Nityãnand Swãmi a question, “Is there 
only one method to attain Bhagvãn, or are there many?  You may say 
that Bhagvãn can  be  attained  by  four  methods – gnãn, vairãgya, 
bhakti,  and dharma.    However,  if Bhagvãn is  attained  by  these  four 
methods, then the principle that kalyãn can be attained exclusively by 
seeking the refuge Bhagvãn is invalid.” 
 
66.6 
Nityãnand  Swãmi  tried  to  answer  the  question  in  many  different 
ways, but was unable to do so satisfactorily. 
 
66.7 
So, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Kalyãn is  only  attained  by  the  refuge  of 
Bhagvãn.    However, Bhagvãn is  very  powerful;  even  the devs live 
under His ãgnã.  In fact, out of fear of Bhagvãn, even the causes of all 
the brahmãnds,  such  as Kãl and Mãyã,  faithfully  follow  His ãgnã.  
Therefore, a bhakta of Bhagvãn should also strictly  follow Bhagvãn’s 
ãgnã; that is the very characteristic of a bhakta of Bhagvãn.  For this 
reason, all other spiritual activities should also be performed strictly.  
Therefore, kalyãn is  possible  only  through Bhagvãn,  whereas  those 
spiritual  activities  are  for  the  purpose  of  pleasing Bhagvãn.    That  is 
the only answer to the question.” 
 
66.8 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked Brahmãnand Swãmi, “Is the jeev that 
dwells within the body, sãkãr, or is it nirãkãr?” 
 
66.9 
Brahmãnand Swãmi replied, “It possesses a svarup.” 
 
66.10 
Hearing this, Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If the jeev did possess a svarup, 
then that would mean it has hands, feet, and other limbs.  However, a 
shlok in  the  tenth skandh of  the  Shreemad  Bhãgvat  states, ‘Bhagvãn 
created  the  buddhi,  indriyas,  man,  and  prãns  to  enable  the  jeev  to 
attain kalyãn’.  If the jeev itself did possess a svarup, then what would 
be  the  need  of  creating  the buddhi, indriyas, man,  and prãns for  it?  
Therefore, after seeing such words in the shãstras, a person can only 
conclude that the jeev is sachidãnand. 

GADHADÃ II 
- 590 - 
66.11
 “That jeev also possesses the kãran body, which is the embodiment of 
eternal  ignorance.    Just  as  a  magnetic  rock  attracts  iron  and  then 
sticks   to   the   iron,   similarly,   the jeev has   a   nature   of   sticking.  
Therefore,  the jeev sticks  to  the  two mãyik bodies – the sthul body 
and  the sukshma body.    Then,  due  to  its  ignorance,  the jeev believes 
those  bodies  to  be  its  own.    In  reality,  the jeev is  not  at  all  like  those 
bodies.” 
 
66.12 
Then, Brahmãnand Swãmi asked, “After the ignorance of the jeev is 
removed  by  the bhakti of Bhagvãn,  the  association  between  the jeev 
and  the  three mãyik bodies  (sthul, sukshma,  and kãran)  no  longer 
remains.    So,  when  the jeev attains  the dhãm of Bhagvãn,  with  what 
type of svarup does it stay there?” 
 
66.13 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “When the jeev’s ignorance  is  dispelled,  its 
association  with  the  three mãyik bodies  is  broken.    Then,  the jeev 
remains  pure  and  composed  of chaitanya.    Then,  by Bhagvãn’s will, 
the jeev receives  a  body  composed  of chaitanya prakruti – which  is 
distinct  from  the  eight  types  of jad prakruti of Bhagvãn.    Then,  with 
that  body,  the jeev stays  in Bhagvãn’s Akshardhãm.    This  is  the 
answer to your question.” 
 
66.14 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked Gopãlãnand Swãmi a question; “It is due 
to  the  grace  of Bhagvãn and  His sant that  a  person  can  master 
ashtãng-yog or  see  the ãtmã.    Then,  why  is  it  that  even  though 
Bhagvãn and His sant are the cause of these, they become secondary; 
and instead, a person’s interest in yog and ãtmã-nishthã increases?” 
 
66.15 
Gopãlãnand Swãmi replied, “After practicing ashtãng-yog,  when  a 
person  actually  masters  it,  he  develops  a  little  pride.    As  a  result,  he 
becomes somewhat less interested in Bhagvãn.” 
 
66.16 
To this, Shreeji Mahãrãj commented, “When a yogi attains siddh-
dashã, he also becomes brahm-rup, and no form of pride is possible in 
brahm.  Therefore, your answer is not correct.” 

GADHADÃ II 
- 591 - 
66.17 
Gopãlãnand Swãmi then said, “Mahãrãj, I cannot understand this.  
Please be compassionate and explain it to me.” 
 
66.18 
So, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “It should be understood  in  the  following 
way:   When   a   person   wishes   to   eradicate   his   faults,   he   should 
eradicate them after seeking advice of a great sant.  For example, if a 
person   has   some   worldly   task   to   perform,   and   he   wants   to 
accomplish  that  job  extremely  well,  he  should  seek  the  advice  of 
some experts.  Similarly, such advice is also necessary for eradicating 
faults.    For  example,  even  though  Shukji  had  become brahm-svarup, 
he  studied  the  Shreemad  Bhãgvat  with  great  enthusiasm.    In  fact, 
even to this very day, he engages in the bhakti of Bhagvãn.  Also, the 
eighty-eight thousand rushis, including Shaunak, had become brahm-
svarup;  but,  they  too  listened  to  the kathãs related  to Bhagvãn from 
Sutpurãni.    Therefore,  a  person  should  take  guidance  from  such 
words to strengthen his bhakti. 
 
66.19 
“For the faults that a person cannot recognise, he should pray to 
Bhagvãn:   ‘Mahãrãj, please be compassionate and destroy whichever 
faults  I  may  have’ – just   as   when   a   man   has   been   accused   of 
something and has no witnesses to disprove the allegation, he proves 
his  innocence  by  holding  a  red-hot  iron  ball.    Similarly,  if  a  fault 
cannot  be  realised,  he  should  pray  to Bhagvãn for  the  eradication  of 
that  fault,  which  amounts  to  holding  the  iron  ball.    A  person  should 
eradicate his faults in this way.  That is the answer to your question.” 
 
66.20 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked Muktãnand Swãmi a question:  “Suppose 
a bhakta of Bhagvãn has  thoroughly  realised Bhagvãn,  but Bhagvãn 
does  not  show  him  any  miracles.    Now,  if  some  other  performer  of 
magical spells does show him a miracle, then upon seeing this, would 
the mind of that bhakta sway from Bhagvãn, or not?” 
 
66.21 
Muktãnand  Swãmi  replied,  “Mahãrãj,  if  a  person  has  absolute 
nishchay in Bhagvãn,  then  he  would  never  have nishchay in  anyone 

GADHADÃ II 
- 592 - 
but Bhagvãn.    On  the  other  hand,  if  a  person  does  have nishchay in 
someone else, then he does not have nishchay in Bhagvãn at all.  Such 
a person is merely a false bhakta; he cannot be called a true bhakta of 
Bhagvãn.” 
 
66.22 
Hearing this, Shreeji Mahãrãj agreed, “That is the exact answer to the 
question.” 
 
66.23
 Finally, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked Shuk Muni, “If a bhakta of Bhagvãn has 
attained  the  understanding  of Bhagvãn and  His sant,  then  how  does 
he benefit while he is alive, and how does he benefit after he dies?” 
 
66.24 
Shuk Muni said, “Mahãrãj, that question can be answered only by 
you.” 
 
66.25 
So, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “While alive, a person who has attained 
Bhagvãn and His sant spends his days and nights engrossed in kathãs 
and kirtans related  to Bhagvãn.    He  also  has  the  direct  realisation  of 
his jeevãtmã,  which  is  beyond  the  three  mental  states,  as  being 
brahm-rup.  With the exception of Bhagvãn, he develops vairãgya for 
all other objects.  Also, he discards adharma and abides by dharma. 
 
66.26 
“When that bhakta dies, Bhagvãn makes him just like Himself.  In fact, 
Bhagvãn had  blessed Brahma:   ‘O Brahmã!  By my grace, may you 
know me as I am, my glory as it is, and my qualities and actions as they 
are’.  So, just as Bhagvãn has blessed Brahmã, He also grants the same 
blessings to all of His faithful bhaktas.  In addition, just as Bhagvãn is 
free  from Kãl, karma,  and Mãyã,  in  the  same  way,  these bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn also  becomes  free  from Kãl, karma,  and Mãyã.    Also,  he 
forever  resides  in  the sevã of Bhagvãn.    This  is  how  that bhakta 
benefits  after  he  abandons  his  body.    That  is  the  answer  to  the 
question.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 66 || 199 || 

GADHADÃ II 
- 593 - 
Gadhadã II – 67 
The Gangãjaliyo Well 
Becoming Like Bhagvãn 
 
67.1 
In the Samvat year 1881, on Mahã vad 3 [6
th
 February 1825], Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress  with  a  large, 
cylindrical  pillow  that  had  been  placed  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on 
the  platform  near  the  Gangãjaliyo  well  adjacent  to  His  residence  in 
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was dressed entirely in white 
clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from various places, 
had gathered before Him in a sabhã.  Some of the sãdhus were singing 
a vishnupad to the accompaniment of a sarodã and dukad. 
  
67.2 
After  thinking  about  the kirtans, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “I wish to ask 
all the sãdhus the following question:  A bhakta of Bhagvãn leaves his 
body,  becomes brahm-rup,  and  attains  the dhãm of Bhagvãn.    Then, 
what  is  the  difference  between  that bhakta and Bhagvãn,  whereby 
the  master-servant  relationship  between  them  still  remains?    After 
all,  that bhakta of Bhagvãn then  becomes  independent,  just  like 
Bhagvãn.  He also becomes free from the restraints of Kãl, karma, and 
Mãyã – just like Bhagvãn.  Therefore, what difference remains so that 
the master-servant relationship is maintained?  This is my question.” 
 
67.3 
The paramhans answered according to their understanding, but they 
could not give a precise answer to Shreeji Mahãrãj’s question.  So, all 
the sãdhus said, “Mahãrãj, your question will only be answered when 
you yourself answer it.” 
 
67.4 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  explained,  “The  answer is  as  follows:    In 
whatever   way   a bhakta of Bhagvãn has   understood Bhagvãn –
‘Bhagvãn possesses this many powers; He possesses  this  much  charm; 
He is the embodiment of bliss’ – that  is  the  extent  to  which  he  has 
understood the greatness of Bhagvãn.  Then, when that bhakta leaves 
his  body  and  goes  to  the dhãm of Bhagvãn,  he  attains  charm  and 

GADHADÃ II 
- 594 - 
powers  based  on  the  extent  to  which he  has  realised  the  majesty  of 
Bhagvãn.    Despite  this,  that bhakta still  feels Bhagvãn’s majesty  (His 
powers  and  charm)  to  be  much  greater.    He  then  realises, ‘Bhagvãn 
has granted me just as many divya powers and as much charm as I had 
realised in Him.  Yet, Bhagvãn’s divya powers and charm appear to be 
totally limitless.  Like me, countless others have also attained qualities 
similar  to  that  of  Bhagvãn,  but  no  one  is  capable  of  becoming  like 
Bhagvãn’. 
 
67.5 
“This is because not even Shesh, Shãrada, Brahmã, the  other devs, or 
the  four  Veds can  understand  the  vastness  of Bhagvãn’s greatness, 
His qualities, His actions, His birth, His power, His charm, His blissful 
nature,  or  His  countless  other kalyãn-kãri.    In  fact, Bhagvãn Himself 
cannot   understand   the   limits   of   His   own   greatness.      Therefore, 
Bhagvãn, with all of His powers, is beyond all limits. 
 
67.6 
“By worshipping that Bhagvãn,  countless  millions  of Vaishnavs have 
become    like Bhagvãn.        However, Bhagvãn’s majesty    has    not 
diminished  even  slightly.    For  example,  even  if  there  were  an  ocean 
filled  with  sweet  water  from  which  all  humans,  animals,  and  birds 
could drink as much as they wished, and from which vessels could be 
filled,  the  water  would  still  not  decrease  because  of  the  vastness  of 
the  ocean.   Similarly, Bhagvãn’s greatness is  infinite;  there  is  no  way 
in  which  it  can  either  increase  or  decrease.    For  this  reason,  those 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn who   become brahm-svarup,   still   behave   as 
Bhagvãn’s servants  and  engage  in  His  worship.    In  this  way, bhaktas 
of Bhagvãn attain  qualities  similar  to  those  of Bhagvãn;  but,  the 
master-servant relationship between them is maintained.  That is the 
answer to the question.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã II || 67 || 200 || 
 
 
|| End of Shree Gadhadã Madhya Prakaran ||

VADTÃL 
- 595 - 
|| SHREE SWÃMINÃRAYAN VIJAYTETRÃM || 
 
VACHANÃMRUT 
Shree Vadtãl Prakaran 
 
Vadtãl – 1 
Nirvikalp Samãdhi 
 
1.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Kãrtik sud 11  [21
st
 November  1825], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  cushion  with  a 
cylindrical  pillow  that  had  been  placed  on  a sinhãsan in  the  mango 
grove along the banks of Lake Gomti on the north side of the mandir 
of Shree Lakshmi-Nãrãyan in  Vadtãl.    He  was  wearing  a  white survãl 
and a white angarkhu.  He had also tied a blue reto around His waist.  
An  orange reto with  edges  decorated  with  golden  threads  was  tied 
around  His  head,  and  another  orange reto with  a  brocaded  border 
was resting upon His shoulder.  In addition to this, a garland of roses 
was hanging around His neck, tassels of roses had been placed upon 
His  head,  and bãjubandh and gajarã had  been  tied  around  His  arms.  
Shreeji Mahãrãj sat in a charming way facing north, while a sabhã of 
munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  gathered  before 
Him. 
 
1.2 
Shobhã-Rãm  Shãstri  of  Vadodarã  asked  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  a  question:  
“Mahãrãj, when a mumukshu attains nirvikalp samãdhi,  he  becomes 
gunãtit and  an ekãntik bhakta of Bhagvãn.   Then, what  becomes of  a 
person who does not attain nirvikalp samãdhi?” 
 
1.3 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Nirvikalp samãdhi is not only attained 
when  the prãns are  controlled.    There  is  another  way  to  attain 
nirvikalp samãdhi,  which  I  shall  explain  to  you;  so,  please  listen 
carefully. 
 
1.4 
“The Shreemad Bhãgvat states: 

VADTÃL 
- 596 - 
atra sargo visargash-cha sthãnam poshanam-utayaha 
manvanta-reshãnu-katha nirodho muktir-ãshrayaha 
The ten characteristics of topics of discussion by which Bhagvãn can be 
realised: sarg, visarg, sthãn, poshan, uti, manvantar-kathã, ishãnu-kathã, 
nirodh, mukti, ãshray. 
  
 “This verse explains that when a mumukshu establishes  a  firm  belief 
of Shree Krishna Bhagvãn, who a person should take the refuge of and 
who  can  be  realised  through  the  nine  characteristics,  then  he  will 
never  have  a  doubt.    For  example,  once  a  person  has  firmly  realised 
that this is a mango tree, then even if he is overcome by kãm, krodh, 
lobh, he will not entertain any doubts such as, ‘Is this a mango tree or 
not?’  In the same way, regardless of whether a person has controlled 
his prãns or not, if he has firm belief of the pratyaksha svarup of Shree 
Krishna Bhagvãn – without  any  doubts  whatsoever – then  he  has 
attained nirvikalp samãdhi. 
 
1.5 
“However, someone may repeatedly have doubts in his mind about 
Bhagvãn’s nature.  For example, he may think, ‘What must Bhagvãn’s 
svarup be like in Akshardhãm?  What must His svarup be like in Shvet-
Dvip and Vaikunth?  When will I have the darshan of that svarup?’  He 
continues  to  have  such  doubts  in  his  mind,  but  he  does  not feel 
fulfilled  by  realising  that  the pratyaksha svarup of Bhagvãn that  he 
has attained is the cause of everything.  Even if he attains samãdhi by 
Bhagvãn’s wish, his doubts are never eradicated.  No matter what he 
sees in samãdhi, he always desires to see something new; the desires 
of his mind are never suppressed.  Even if such a person experiences 
samãdhi,  it  is savikalp samãdhi;  and  even  if  he  does  not  experience 
samãdhi, it is still savikalp samãdhi.  Therefore, such a person cannot 
be  called  a gunãtit, ekãntik bhakta.    A  person  who  does  have  firm 
nishchay in Bhagvãn,  regardless  of  whether  he  has samãdhi or  not, 
can be said to have constant nirvikalp samãdhi.” 
 
1.6 
Then,  Dinã-Nãth Bhatt asked, “What will become of a person who 
fails to conquer the mind, despite attempting to eradicate the desires 
in his mind?” 

VADTÃL 
- 597 - 
1.7 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “As the war between the Kauravs and the 
Pãndavs was set to begin, the Kauravs and the Pãndavs thought, ‘Let 
us engage in the battle in such a holy place that even if we are killed in 
the fighting, our jeev will still benefit.’  With this thought in mind, they 
eventually fought a battle, attained Dev-Lok, and obtained happiness 
greater than that of ruling over a kingdom. 
 
1.8 
“Therefore, regarding a person who takes up a fight with his mind – if 
he  wins,  then  he  attains nirvikalp samãdhi and  becomes  an ekãntik 
bhakta of Bhagvãn.    However,  if  he  should  lose  to  his  mind,  he  falls 
from his spiritual activities.  Then, maybe after one life or two lives or 
even  after  many  lives, he  will  become  an ekãntik bhakta;  but,  his 
efforts will not have been useless. 
 
1.9 
“Therefore, a person who is wise should definitely develop hatred 
towards his mind for the sake of his kalyãn.  Then, if he conquers his 
mind, he is sure to benefit; but, even if he is defeated by his mind, he 
will  eventually  return  to  the  path  of  enlightenment  which  is  also 
beneficial  in  the  end.    Therefore,  a  person  who  aspires  for kalyãn 
should most certainly develop hatred towards his mind.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 1 || 201 || 
 
 
Vadtãl – 2 
Realising Bhagvãn Through The Five Shãstras 
 
2.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Kãrtik sud 13  [22
nd
 November  1825], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated 
bedstead  under  a  mango  tree  on  the  banks  of  Lake  Gomti,  north  of 
the mandir of Shree Lakshmi-Nãrãyan in  Vadtãl.    He  was  wearing  a 
survãl made  from  yellow,  silken  cloth  and  a  red dagli made  from 
kinkhãb.    He  had  also  tied  a pãgh around  His  head  using  an  orange 
cloth  with  a  brocaded  border.    An  orange shelu with  a  brocaded 

VADTÃL 
- 598 - 
border  was  placed  upon  His  shoulder.    In  addition  to  this,  His pãgh 
was  decorated  with  garlands  of champã flowers,  and  garlands  of 
white  flowers  were  hanging  around  His  neck.    A sabhã of munis,  as 
well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
2.2 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “Please  begin  a  question-answer 
discussion.” 
 
2.3 
Then,  Kãndãsji  Patel  of  the  village  Buvã  folded  his  hands  and  asked, 
“Mahãrãj, by what means does Bhagvãn become pleased?” 
 
2.4 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If we do not insult Bhagvãn,  then Bhagvãn 
becomes  pleased.   Then, you  may  ask, ‘What does it mean to criticise 
Bhagvãn?’  Well, Bhagvãn is the all-doer of this world.  However, if a 
person  does  not  understand  Him  to  be  the  all-doer  and  instead 
believes  that  it  is Kãl that  is  the  all-doer  of  this  world,  or  that  it  is 
Mãyã,  or  that  it  is karma,  or  that  is  the svabhãv that  is  the all-doer, 
then he is insulting Bhagvãn.  This is because actually Bhagvãn is the 
all-doer.  To ignore this and to claim that only Kãl, karma, Mãyã, and 
svabhãv are the all-doers of this world is serious against Bhagvãn. 
 
2.5 
“For example, you are the Patel (chief of a village) of your village.  If 
someone does not acknowledge your status in the village, then he can 
be  said  to  be  your  slanderer.    Also,  if  someone  does  not  accept  the 
control of an emperor of the world, but instead accepts the control of 
a  person  who  is  not  even  a  king,  then  that  man  is  known  as  a 
slanderer  of  the  emperor.    If  a  person  writes  and  distributes  letters 
stating, ‘Our king has no nose and ears; he has no hands or feet’,  and 
therefore, describes the king as being deformed even though he has a 
normal  body,  then  he  is  also  known  as  a  slanderer  of  the  king.  
Similarly, Bhagvãn is complete, with limbs, hands, and feet.  There is 
not  the  slightest  deformation  in  any  of  His  limbs.    He  eternally 
possesses a definite svarup.  So, to say that He is not the all-doer and 
is nirãkãr,  and  that Kãl, Mãyã, karma are  the  cause  of  all – not 
Bhagvãn – is equivalent to insulting Bhagvãn. 

VADTÃL 
- 599 - 
2.6 
“A person who does not insult Bhagvãn in  this  way  is  said  to  have 
performed  perfect pujã of Bhagvãn.    Otherwise,  without  such  an 
understanding,  even  if  a person  performs pujã by  offering  items  like 
sandalwood  paste  and  flowers,  he  is  still  a  slanderer  of Bhagvãn.  
Therefore, Bhagvãn is  only  pleased  upon  a  person  who  realises 
Bhagvãn to possess a definite svarup and to be the creator, sustainer, 
and destroyer of the universe. 
 
2.7 
“In the Veds, Bhagvãn Himself  has  described  His  nature  in  many 
ways,  but  no  one  could  understand  it.    Then,  the  Sãnkhya shãstras 
prescribed  the  twenty-four tattvas and  said  that Bhagvãn is  the 
twenty-fifth tattva.    The ãchãrya of  the  Sãnkhya  philosophy,  Kapil 
Muni,  thought, ‘The jeev behaves as if it is one with the three types of 
bodies (sthul, sukshma, and kãran) and it cannot remain separate from 
them.  The ishvar also behaves as if it is one with its three bodies (virãt, 
sutrãtmã, and avyãkrut) and it too cannot remain separate from them.’  
Therefore,  the  Sãnkhya shãstras count jeev and ishvar amongst  the 
twenty-four tattvas and  claim Paramãtmã to  be  the  twenty-fifth 
tattva. 
 
2.8 
“The ãchãrya of  the  Yog shãstras,  Hiranyagarbh  Rushi,  explains  that 
there are twenty-four tattvas, and that jeev and ishvar are the twenty-
fifth tattva; but, Paramãtmã is the twenty-sixth. 
 
2.9 
“This is how the Sãnkhya shãstras and  the  Yog shãstras described 
Bhagvãn’s nature;  still,  no  one  attained  understanding  of  the  nature 
of the Bhagvãn as He is.  So, according to the Sãnkhya shãstras, it was 
concluded, ‘Whatever  is  greater  than  the  twenty-four   elements   is 
satya’;   and   according   to   the   Yog shãstras,   it   was   concluded, 
‘Paramãtmã, who is greater than jeev and ishvar, who themselves is 
beyond the twenty-four elements, is satya’.  In this way, through these 
two  philosophies,  the  nature  of Bhagvãn was  realised.    However,  is 
that Bhagvãn black,  or  yellow?    Is  He  tall,  or  short?    Is  He sãkãr,  or 
nirãkãr?  That was not realised. 

VADTÃL 
- 600 - 
2.10 
“Then, Vãsudev Bhagvãn composed the Panch-Rãtra Tãntra, in which 
he  explained, ‘In his own Akshardhãm, Shree Krishna Purushottam 
Bhagvãn  eternally  possesses  a  divya  sãkãr  murti.    This  Bhagvãn  gives 
darshan  five  times  to  the  countless  niranna-muktas  of  Shvet-Dvip.    In 
Vaikunth,  that  same  Bhagvãn  assumes  a  four-armed  form,  holding  a 
shankh,  a  chakra,  a  gadã,  and  a  padma.    Along  with  Him  is  Lakshmiji.  
He  is  also  served  by  Vishvaksen  and  other  pãrshads.    It  is  that  same 
Bhagvãn  who  is  worthy  of  being  offered  pujã,  worthy  of  worship  and 
worthy  of  attainment.    It  is  that  same  Bhagvãn  who  assumes  the 
avatars  of  Ram  and  Krishna,  and  who  appears  in  the  four  forms  of 
Vãsudev,  Sankarshan,  Pradyumna,  and  Aniruddha’.      In   this   way, 
Vãsudev Bhagvãn explained that Bhagvãn possesses a sãkãr murti. 
 
2.11
 “Then, Nãradji revised  that  same  Panch-Rãtra  Tãntra,  after  which  it 
came  to  be  known  as  the  Nãrad  Panch-Rãtra.    In  that, Bhagvãn’s 
svarup was explained in such a way that not even the slightest doubt 
remained.    Also,  Shivji  explained  the  four-armed svarup and  eight-
armed svarup of Bhagvãn in the Pashupãt-Shãstra. 
 
2.12
 “Therefore, the Shreemad Bhãgvat states: 
 
nãrãyana-parã vedã devã nãrãyan-ãngajãhã 
nãrãyana-parã lokã nãrãyana-parã makhãhã 
nãrãyana-paro yogo nãrãyana-param tapaha 
nãrãyana-param gnãnam nãrãyana-parã gatihi 
The Veds are devoted to Nãrãyan, and the essence of the Veds is Nãrãyan; the 
devs are all formed from the svarup of Nãrãyan; the loks are all devoted to 
Nãrãyan, and all the loks are pervaded by Nãrãyan; all yagnas are devoted to 
Nãrãyan.  All yog is devoted to Nãrãyan; all tap is devoted to Nãrãyan; all 
gnãn is devoted to Nãrãyan; and Nãrãyan is the objective of all activities. 
 
vãsudeva-parã vedã vãsudeva-parã makhãhã 
vãsudeva-parã yogã vãsudeva-parãhã kriyãhã 
vãsudeva-param gnãnam vãsudeva-param tapaha 
vãsudeva-paro dharmo vãsudeva-parã gatihi 
The Veds are devoted to Vãsudev, and the essence of the Veds is Vãsudev; all 
yagnas are devoted to Vãsudev; all yog is devoted to Vãsudev; all activities are 

VADTÃL 
- 601 - 
devoted to Vãsudev.  All gnãn is devoted to Vãsudev; all tap is devoted to 
Vãsudev; all dharma is devoted to Vãsudev; and Vãsudev is the objective of all 
activities. 
 
2.13 
“Therefore,  the  five shãstras have  described  the  nature  of Shree 
Krishna Vãsudev only.    Only  a  person  who  realises Bhagvãn through 
these  five shãstras can  be  said  to  possess  total gnãn.    For  example, 
only  when  a  person  sees  with  his  eyes  does  he  come  to  know  that 
milk  is  white;  only  when  he  smells  with  his  nose  does  he  come  to 
know its smell; only when he touches it with his finger does he come 
to know whether it is hot or cold; and only when he tastes it with his 
tongue does he come to know its taste.  In this way, only when milk is 
tested through all the indriyas can a person totally know its nature; it 
cannot  be  totally  known  through  one indriya alone.    Similarly,  a 
person  realises Bhagvãn’s nature  totally  when  he  realises  it  through 
the five shãstras.  To have such knowledge is called total gnãn. 
 
2.14 
“Bhagvãn is     pleased     only     upon     someone     who     has     such 
understanding;  there  is  no  other  means  of  pleasing  Him.    Therefore, 
only a person who has this understanding can be said to possess total 
gnãn,  and Bhagvãn becomes  extremely  pleased  only  upon  such  a 
person.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 2 || 202 || 
 
 
Vadtãl – 3 
Bhakti Coupled With Bhagvãn’s Greatness 
 
3.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Kãrtik vad 11  [6
th
 December  1825], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a sinhãsan in  the 
mandir of Shree Lakshmi-Nãrãyan in Vadtãl.  He was dressed entirely 
in  white  clothes.    He  was  also  wearing  garlands  of  roses  around  His 
neck,  and  tassels  decorated  the pãgh upon  His  head.    A sabhã of  all 
the munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before Him. 

VADTÃL 
- 602 - 
3.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “In our Uddhav Sampradãy a person who 
has dharma, gnãn, vairãgya, and bhakti towards Bhagvãn is called an 
ekãntik bhakta, and only he is worthy of being made renowned in our 
satsang.  However, if these four qualities are not perfect and only one 
is  predominant,  then  which  of  the  four  is  the  best,  and  incorporates 
the other three?”  
 
3.3 
Gopãlãnand Swãmi and Muktãnand Swãmi replied, “Mahãrãj, dharma 
is  the  best,  because  if  there  is dharma then  the  other  three  qualities 
will eventually develop in that person.” 
 
3.4 
To this, Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Dharma may  be  present  even  in 
those  who  are vimukhs.    Does  that  mean  that  we  should  make  them 
renowned in satsang?” 
 
3.5 
Hearing  this  argument,  no  one  could  give  a  reply  to  the  question.  
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then explained,  “If  a  person has bhakti towards 
Bhagvãn coupled  with  knowledge  of  His  greatness,  he  will  never  fall 
from dharma – even  if  he  has  a  lesser  degree  of ãtmã-nishthã, 
vairãgya,   and dharma.      This   is   because   a   person   who   realises 
Bhagvãn’s greatness,  thinks, ‘If Brahmã and all the other devs follow 
Bhagvãn’s ãgnã, then how can I not follow His ãgnã?’  Bearing  this  in 
mind, he always abides by the niyams prescribed by Bhagvãn.” 
 
3.6
 Then, Shuk Muni asked, “If bhakti coupled  with  the  knowledge  of 
Bhagvãn’s greatness   alone   is   enough,   why   are   all   four   qualities 
prescribed as essential, and not just bhakti alone?” 
 
3.7 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If a person has intense bhakti for Bhagvãn 
coupled  with  the  knowledge  of  His  greatness,  then  all  three  are 
incorporated  in bhakti alone.    But,  if  his bhakti is  of  a  medium 
intensity,   then   the   other   three   are   not   incorporated   within   it.  
Therefore, it is said, ‘A person who has the type of bhakti which include 
all four qualities can be called an ekãntik bhakta’. 

VADTÃL 
- 603 - 
3.8 
“Pruthu Rãjã had such extraordinary bhakti.  When Bhagvãn awarded 
a vardãn upon  him,  he  asked  for  ten  thousand  ears  in  order  to  hear 
kathãs related  to Bhagvãn;  he  did  not ask  for  anything  else.    Also, 
some gopis who  were  forbidden  to  go  and  play rãs discarded  their 
bodies  and  went  to Shree  Krishna in  spirit.    If  a  person  has  such 
extraordinary bhakti,    then    the    other    three    qualities    are    all 
incorporated in bhakti alone.” 
 
3.9
 Brahmãnand  Swãmi  then  asked,  “By  what  means  can  such 
extraordinary bhakti be attained?” 
 
3.10 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “It is attained by serving a great sant.  
There  are  four  types  of  great sant.    One  is  like  a  small  flame,  the 
second is like a torch, the third is like lightning, and the fourth is like 
the vadvãnal fire. 
 
3.11 
“A person, who is like a small flame, is extinguished by the wind in 
the form of the vishays.  A person, who is like a torch, is extinguished 
by stronger gusts of wind in the form of the vishays.  A person, who is 
like  lightning,  is  not  extinguished  even  by  rainwater  in  the  form  of 
mãyã.    However, vadvãnal fire  stays  in  the  ocean  without  being 
extinguished by the ocean water; it drinks the sea water and excretes 
it in the form of sweet water; in turn, the clouds carry this water and 
shower  it  upon  the  world;  and  from  this,  many  types  of  tastes  are 
formed.    Similarly,  a  great sant,  like  the vadvãnal fire,  transforms 
even the ‘salty’ jeevs who  are  like  the  saline  sea  water,  into ‘sweet’ 
jeevs. 
 
3.12 
“Of the four types of great sant just  described,  if  a  person  serves 
someone  who  is  like  lightning  or  the vadvãnal fire – by  thought, 
word,  and  deed,  and  while  staying  within  his dharma – then bhakti 
coupled  with  the  knowledge  of Bhagvãn’s greatness  develops  in  that 
person. 
 
3.13 
“Also, a person should realise that the person who is like lightning is 
known  as Bhagvãn’s ekãntik sãdhu – who  is  in sãdhan-dashã.    The 

VADTÃL 
- 604 - 
person  who  is  like  the vadvãnal fire  is  known  as Bhagvãn’s great 
ekãntik sant – who has attained siddh-dashã.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 3 || 203 || 
 
 
Vadtãl – 4 
The Thirty Qualities Of A Sant 
 
4.1
 In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Mãgshar sud 10  [19
th
 December  1825], 
Swãmi Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in the mandir of Shree 
Lakshmi-Nãrãyan in Vadtãl.  He was dressed entirely in white clothes.  
A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had 
gathered before Him. 
 
4.2 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “Please  being  a  question-answer 
discussion.” 
 
4.3 
Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “For a bhakta of Bhagvãn who  has 
taken  the  path  of bhakti, which  one spiritual  activity  includes  all  the 
other activities for kalyãn?” 
 
4.4 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “All  the  spiritual  activities  for  attaining 
kalyãn are included in keeping the company – by thought, word, and 
deed – of a sant who possesses the thirty qualities of a sãdhu.” 
 
4.5
 After replying to the question, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Suppose there 
is an ekãntik bhakta yogi who realises that the philosophy of both the 
Sãnkhya shãstras and  the  Yog shãstras is  based  upon  only Vãsudev-
Nãrãyan.    By  what  means  does  that yogi fix  his vrutti on Bhagvãn’s 
murti?    How  does  he  control  his mind?    How  does he  keep his vrutti 
facing  inwards?    How  does  he  keep  his vrutti facing  outwards?    By 
which   of   his yogic abilities   does   he   separate   himself   from   the 
obstacles  of  disturbing  thoughts  and  desires,  as  well  as  from  the 
absorption of sleep?  Please answer these questions.” 

VADTÃL 
- 605 - 
 
4.6 
Then,   Muktãnand   Swãmi   and   Gopãlãnand   Swãmi   attempted   to 
answer  these  questions  to  the  best  of  their  ability,  but  neither  of 
them  was  able  to  give  a  satisfactory  reply.    So,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said, 
“When water goes into a fountain, it first revolves in a spiral and then 
spurts  upwards;  in  the  same  way,  the vrutti of  the jeev revolves  in  a 
spiral  in  the antah-karans,  which  acts  like  the  fountain,  and  then 
spurts  out  through  the  five indriyas.    A yogi does  this  in  two  ways:  
With  one vrutti,  he  thinks  of Shree  Vãsudev  Bhagvãn who  resides  in 
his  heart  as  a  witness.   With  the  second vrutti he  faces  outwards 
through  his  eyes,  and  he  thinks  about Bhagvãn who  is  outside.    He 
thinks of the whole murti from head to toe; he does not only think of 
a  single  part  of  the  body.    Just  as  when  a  person  looks  at  a  large 
mandir, he sees it completely as a whole; or when a person looks at a 
large  mountain,  he  sees  it  totally;  similarly,  the yogi sees Bhagvãn’s 
murti in  the  same  way,  but  he  does  not  see  each  part  of Bhagvãn’s 
body separately. 
 
4.7 
“When he observes the murti at a distance through his eyes, if he sees 
some  other  object  besides Bhagvãn,  then  he  draws  that murti of 
Bhagvãn closer  and  observes  it  at  the  tip  of  his  nose.    Even  after 
doing  this,  if  he  still  sees  some  object  nearby,  then  he  observes  the 
murti of Bhagvãn between his eyebrows.  While doing this, if he feels 
lazy  or  sleepy,  then  he  would  again  observe  the murti of Bhagvãn 
before  his  eyes.    Then,  in  the  same  way  that  a  child  flies  a  kite,  he 
would  fly  a  kite  (Bhagvãn’s murti)  with  a  string  (vrutti).    He  would 
make  it  rise  upwards,  then  bring  it  down  again,  and  then  make  it 
sweep from side to side.  Using his yogic powers in this way, when he 
becomes  alert,  he  would  again  observe  the murti at  the  tip  of  his 
nose,  and  from  there  he  would  bring  it  between  his  eyebrows,  and 
then he would draw it into his heart.  Then, he would merge together 
both the murti of Bhagvãn that resides in his heart as a witness, and 
the murti of Bhagvãn that is outside.  At this point, the two vruttis of 
the antah-karans become one. 

VADTÃL 
- 606 - 
4.8 
“While doing this, if he feels lazy or sleepy again, then he would bring 
the murti outside  again  using  the  two  types  of vruttis.    In  the  same 
way as with his eyes, he would use his ears, hands, tongue, and nose 
to perfect yog.  Also, he would observe Bhagvãn’s murti with his man, 
buddhi, chitt,  and ahankãr.    Then,  by  using  the sãnkhya thought 
process,  he  would  distinguish  himself  from  his indriyas and antah-
karans and would observe only the murti of Bhagvãn in his chaitanya.  
While  he  is  beholding  the  form,  whether  it  be  inside  or  outside,  if 
some  disturbance  regarding  worldly  affairs  obstructs  him,  then  he 
would  remove  the  problem  while  continuing  to  observe  the murti; 
but,   he   would   not   abandon   his yogic activities   because   of   the 
disturbance.  This is how a yogi with such yogic powers behaves.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 4 || 204 || 
 
 
Vadtãl – 5 
A Bhakta Should Not Perceive Mãyã In Bhagvãn 
 
5.1
 In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Mãgshar vad 4,  [29
th
 December  1825], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  facing  north  on  a 
decorated  seat  under  a  mango  tree  along  the  banks  of  Lake  Gomti, 
north  of  the mandir of Shree  Lakshmi-Nãrãyan in  Vadtãl.    He  was 
dressed entirely in extremely fine, white clothes, and He had several 
garlands  of  roses  hanging  around  His  neck.    Bunches  of  two  large 
roses  had  been  placed  upon  His  ears,  and  tassels  of  roses  decorated 
His pãgh.    A sabhã of  all  the munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
5.2
 Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Please ask complex questions in order to 
relieve everyone’s tiredness.”  Having said that, Mahãrãj put a pillow 
facing west and lay down. 
 
5.3 
Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Shree Krishna Bhagvãn has said:  
 

VADTÃL 
- 607 - 
daivee hyeshã guna-mayee mama mãyã duratyayã 
mãm-eva ye prapadyante mãyãm-etãm taranti te 
 
 “This verse means, ‘A person who attains me will break through my 
Mãyã, which is composed of the three gun, and which cannot otherwise 
be broken through even by suffering hardships’.  However, even after a 
person  has  attained Bhagvãn,  he  is  still  disturbed  by  thoughts  and 
desires  in  his  heart  during  the  worship  of Bhagvãn.    What  else, 
besides Mãyã, could be causing this?  That is the question.” 
 
5.4 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  sat  upright  from  His  lying  posture,  and  with  great 
compassion said, “Of the three gun of Mãyã, tamo-gun is predominant 
in the five bhuts, and the five tan-mãtras; rajo-gun is predominant in 
the   ten indriyas,   the buddhi,   and   the prãns; and sattva-gun is 
predominant  in  the man and  the  presiding devs of  the indriyas and 
antah-karans.    In  the  past,  all  those  who  have  become bhaktas have 
possessed the products of the three gun – the bhuts, the indriyas, the 
antah-karans, and their presiding devs.  Therefore, the answer to the 
question is as follows:  A person who has the firm belief of Bhagvãn – 
who  has  realised Bhagvãn completely  by  believing  that  there  are  no 
mãyik qualities in His svarup, and that Bhagvãn is greater than Mãyã 
and   the   products   of Mãyã (the   three gun) – has   gone   beyond 
Bhagvãn’s Mãyã.  Even though he has the products of the gun of mãyã 
within   him   (the bhuts,  the indriyas,   the antah-karans,   and   their 
presiding devs,  each  of  which  carries  out  its  respective  activities)  he 
is  still  said  to  have  gone  beyond Mãyã.    This is  because  even  though 
the   products   of Mãyã are   within   him,   he   still   realises   that   the 
pratyaksha  svarup of Shree  Vãsudev  Bhagvãn,  who  is  worthy  to  be 
worshipped by him, is beyond the gun of Mãyã; therefore, he himself 
should also be known to have gone beyond Mãyã. 
 
5.5 
“Even the shãstras acknowledge that the gun seem to have influenced 
all,  including  the devs and  the rushis.    Does  that  imply  that  they 
cannot  be  called muktas?    Also,  does  that  imply  that  they  cannot  be 
said to have gone beyond Mãyã?  In fact, they are all muktas, and they 

VADTÃL 
- 608 - 
have  all  gone  beyond Mãyã.    If  we  do  not  answer  in  this  way  then 
there is no other possible solution to that question.  Therefore, this is 
the only answer.” 
 
5.6 
Then, Nityãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, people go to seek the refuge 
of Bhagvãn.  Then, what are the characteristics of having the refuge of 
Bhagvãn?” 
 
5.7 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Bhagvãn has said in the Geetã,  
 
sarva-dharmãn-parityajya mãm-ekam sharanam vraja 
aham tvã sarva-pãpebhyo mokshayishyãmi mã shuchaha 
 
 “In  this  verse  he  says, ‘Abandon  all  other  forms  of  dharma  and 
surrender only to me.  I shall deliver you from all sins, so do not grieve’.  
A  person  who  has  such  a  firm  refuge  of Bhagvãn,  even  if he  were  to 
experience  pain  equivalent  to  that  of  final  destruction,  he  would  not 
believe  anyone  else  to  be  his  guardian  against  such  misery,  except 
Bhagvãn.    Moreover,  whatever  happiness  he  wishes  for,  he  seeks  to 
attain only from Bhagvãn.  He does not consider anyone but Bhagvãn 
to be the source of happiness.  Moreover, he behaves only according 
to the wishes of Bhagvãn.  Such a person can be known to have taken 
refuge  in Bhagvãn.    It  is  he  who  can  be  called  a  firm bhakta of 
Bhagvãn.” 
 
5.8 
Then, Nãjã Bhakta asked, “How can a person recognise someone who, 
when he speaks, shows that he has nishchay in Bhagvãn like that of a 
bhakta, but does not truly have the total refuge of Bhagvãn?” 
 
5.9 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Only after staying together and working 
together  can  a  person  recognise  the  strength  or  weakness  of  the 
nishchay of  a bhakta of Bhagvãn.    A  person  who  has  little nishchay 
would  become  distressed  and  find  a  path  out  of satsang.    He  would 
seek privacy where he could engage in worship to his capacity, but he 
would  not  be  able  to  tolerate  the  pressures  of  living  in  the  company 

VADTÃL 
- 609 - 
of bhaktas.    Therefore,  refuge  of Bhagvãn is  of  three  levels:   uttam, 
madhyam,   and kanishth.      Due   to   this,   there   are   three   levels   of 
bhaktas.” 
 
5.10 
Then, Nityãnand Swãmi asked, “Can  a bhakta who  is  of  the kanishth 
level eradicate his deficiency and become a bhakta of the uttam level 
in this very life, or not?” 
 
5.11 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Just as a bhakta performs the mãnsi pujã of 
Bhagvãn,  a person should  also  performs  the mãnsi pujã of  the uttam 
bhakta along  with Bhagvãn,  by  offering  him  the prasãd of Bhagvãn; 
and just as a bhakta prepares a thãl for Bhagvãn, a person should also 
prepare  a thãl for Bhagvãn’s uttam bhakta and  serve  it  to  him;  and 
just as a bhakta donates five rupees to Bhagvãn, a person should also 
donates  money  to  the  great sant.    Then,  by  performing sevã of 
Bhagvãn and  His sant,  who  possesses  the  highest  qualities,  with 
extreme  love – even  if  he  is  a bhakta of  the kanishth type  and  was 
destined  to  become  a bhakta of  the  highest  type  after  two  lives,  or 
after  four  lives,  or  after  ten  lives,  or  after  a  hundred  lives – he  will 
become  a bhakta of  the uttam level  in  this  very  life.    These  are  the 
rewards of the sevã of Bhagvãn and His bhaktas.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 5 || 205 || 
 
 
Vadtãl – 6 
The Jeev Remains Within Mãyã After Destruction 
 
6.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Mãgshar vad 11  [4
th
 January  1826], 
Swãmi Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a platform in front 
of  the mandir of Shree  Lakshmi-Nãrãyan in  Vadtãl.    He  was  dressed 
entirely  in  white  clothes.    Garlands  of  flowers  had  been  placed 
around  His  neck,  and  tassels  of  flowers  were  also  hanging  from  His 

VADTÃL 
- 610 - 
pãgh.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places, 
had gathered before Him. 
 
6.2 
Then,    Chiman-Rãvji  asked,  “Mahãrãj,  initially,  at  the  time  of 
destruction,  the jeevs with  their kãran bodies  were  absorbed  within 
Mãyã.  Then, at the time of creation, the jeevs attained their sthul and 
sukshma bodies.    Also,  a  variety  of  life  (devs,  humans,  animals,  and 
plants)  was  created.    Was  this  due  to karmas?    Or  was  it  due  to 
Bhagvãn’s wish?  If we say that it was due to karmas, then that would 
prove  the  Jain  philosophy  to  be  true.    On  the  other  hand,  if  we  say 
that it was due to Bhagvãn’s wish, then it would suggest that Bhagvãn 
is  biased  and  not  compassionate.    Therefore,  please  grace  us  by 
telling us how things really are.” 
 
6.3 
Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “You have not been able to ask the question 
properly.    The sthul and sukshma bodies  are  both  closely  associated 
with the kãran body in the same way that a tree is closely associated 
with  its  seed.    That  is  why  it  is  called  the kãran body.    This kãran 
body  is  a  form  of avidyã;  it  is  without  a  beginning;  and  it  retains  its 
sanchit karmas.      Just   as   a   seed   and   its   shell   have   an   eternal 
relationship,    and    just    as pruthvi and    smell    have    an    eternal 
relationship,  similarly,  the jeev and  the kãran body  have  an  eternal 
relationship.      Just   as   when   planted   seeds   sprout   upwards   after 
coming into  contact  with  rainwater,  similarly,  during  the  period  of 
creation,  the jeevs,  which  had  resided  within Mãyã together  with 
their kãran bodies,  attain  various  types  of  bodies  according  to  their 
individual karmas by the will of Bhagvãn, the giver of the rewards of 
karmas. 
 
6.4
 “However, the Jains, who are nãstiks,  claim  that  only karmas are  the 
cause  of  this,  but  they  do  not  describe Bhagvãn as  the  giver  of  the 
fruits  of karmas.    However,  in  reality,  this  belief  of  those nãstiks is 
wrong.    Therefore, if  someone  claims  that kãl is  the  only  influencing 
force,  then  he  is  not  correct;  or,  if  someone  claims  that karma is  the 

VADTÃL 
- 611 - 
only  influencing  force,  then  he  is  not  correct;  or,  if  someone  claims 
that Bhagvãn’s wish is the only influencing force, then even he is not 
correct.  The shãstras would describe the predominance of whichever 
influence is predominant at that time; but that same influence should 
not be accepted for all situations. 
 
6.5 
“This is because after the world was created, in  the  first Satya-Yug, 
everyone’s wishes came true, all were brãhmans,  and  a  child  would 
be  born  merely  by  mentally  wishing  for  one.    There  was  a kalpa-
vruksh in  every  home,  and  all  people  worshipped  only Bhagvãn.  
Then,  with  the  arrival  of Tretã-Yug,  people’s wishes were no longer 
fulfilled;  only  when  a  person  went  and  stood  under  a kalpa-vruksh 
did  his  wishes  become  fulfilled;  and  only  after  touching  a  woman 
would   a   child   be   conceived.      Then,   when Dvãpar-Yug arrived, 
children  were  born  only  after  physical association  with  a  woman.  
However, the ways of Satya-Yug and Tretã-Yug are not to be found in 
all Satya-Yugs and Tretã-Yugs;  they  were  found  only  in  the  first 
Satya-Yug and the first Tretã-Yug. 
 
6.6 
“Therefore,  when  there  is  the  predominance  of  pleasant kãl,   it 
diminishes  the  power  of  the  impure karmas of  the jeevs.    However, 
when  a  terrible  famine  strikes,  everyone  suffers;  or  when  there  is  a 
horrendous war, hundreds of thousands of people are killed at once.  
In these cases were everyone’s pleasant karmas suddenly used up at 
the same time?  Instead, it is the intense power of unpleasant kãl that 
overcomes the force of the pleasant karmas of the jeevs.  So, when the 
influence of intense kãl prevails, karmas have no influence; due to the 
influence  of kãl, karmas that  should  have  resulted  in  happiness  lead 
to  misery,  and karmas that  should  have  resulted  in  long  life  lead  to 
death.    In  this  way,  when  the  influence  of  a  strong kãl is  prevalent, 
everything occurs due to kãl.  This is mentioned in the shãstras. 
 
6.7 
“However, when many people become ekãntik bhaktas of Bhagvãn, 
then Satya-Yug prevails even in Kali-Yug.  In these circumstances, the 

VADTÃL 
- 612 - 
shãstras describe the strength of the pleasant karmas that result from 
the ekãntik bhaktas performing bhakti of Bhagvãn, but the strength of 
kãl is not mentioned. 
 
6.8 
“Without  understanding  this  principle,  those  who  believe  in  the 
nãstik philosophy   describes that   only karmas are   the   cause   of 
everything;  but,  they  do  not  realise  that  the  principle  is  in  reference 
to   the   strength   of   the karmas of ekãntik bhaktas of Bhagvãn.  
However, karmas of vimukhs are  not  said  to  have  such  strength.  
When Bhagvãn takes birth with the wish, ‘During this lifespan, I wish 
to grant kalyãn to all jeevs, both worthy and unworthy, who come into 
contact  with  my  murti’,   then kãl and karma have   no   influence 
whatsoever.    At  that  time,  only Bhagvãn’s influence  prevails.    When 
Bhagvãn assumed the avatar of Krishna, the evil Putnã tried to poison 
Bhagvãn;  still, Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn gave  her  the  same fate  as  His 
mother  Yashodã.    There  were  other  evil  demons  that  came  to  kill 
Bhagvãn;  but,  even  they  were  granted Akshardhãm by Shree  Krishna 
Bhagvãn.    Others  were  also  granted kalyãn according  to  the  feelings 
by   which   they   were   associated   with Shree   Krishna   Bhagvãn.  
Therefore,  in  those  instances,  only Bhagvãn’s influence  is  said  to  be 
prevalent,  but  neither kãl nor karma is  said  to  have  any  influences.  
Therefore,  a  person  should  interpret  situations  according  to  the 
circumstances in which they occur.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 6 || 206 || 
 
 
Vadtãl – 7 
The Characteristics Of Religious And Demonic People 
 
7.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Mãgshar vad 14  [7
th
 January  1826], 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  platform  in  front  of  the mandir of 
Shree Lakshmi-Nãrãyan in  Vadtãl.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various 
places, had gathered before Him. 

VADTÃL 
- 613 - 
7.2 
In   the sabhã,   the bhaktas were   talking   about Bhagvãn amongst 
themselves, when the topic arose that there are two types of people:  
religious  and  demonic.    Of  these,  religious  people  always  become 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn,   whereas   the   demonic   will   always   remain 
opposed to Bhagvãn. 
 
7.3 
Then,   Chiman-Rãvji  asked  a  question:    “Mahãrãj  is  there  any 
possibility of a demonic person becoming religious?” 
 
7.4 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A demonic person most certainly does not 
become  religious.    This  is  because  he  has  a  demonic  nature  from 
birth.  If such a person somehow enters satsang, he still does not lose 
his  demonic  nature.    Then,  when  he  leaves  his  physical  body  after 
staying  in satsang,  he  is  absorbed  into brahm and  then  emerges  out 
again.    Only  after  he  does  so  countless  times  is  his  demonic  nature 
destroyed; otherwise, it is not destroyed.” 
 
7.5 
Then, Shobhã-Rãm Shãstri asked, “Mahãrãj, what is Bhagvãn’s anvay 
nature, and what is His vyatirek nature?” 
 
7.6 
Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “The principle of anvay-vyatirek is not that 
Bhagvãn has become half anvay within Mãyã and half vyatirek svarup 
His dhãm.    Instead, Bhagvãn’s svarup is  such  that He  is anvay within 
Mãyã, and  at  the  same  time,  He  is vyatirek.   Bhagvãn is  not  afraid, 
‘What  if  I  enter  Mãyã  and  then become impure?’  Instead,  when 
Bhagvãn associates with Mãyã, even Mãyã becomes like Akshardhãm; 
and  if  He  associates  with  the  twenty-four tattvas,  then  they  also 
become brahm-rup.  Therefore, the Shreemad Bhãgvat states: 
 
dhãmnã svena sadã nirasta-kuhakam satyam param dheemahi 
We perform dhyãn upon Bhagvãn, who destroyed the deception via His own 
svarup, in the form of the products of Mãyã.  This is the supremely satya 
svarup of Bhagvãn. 
 
“In this way, there are countless such statements which describe 
Bhagvãn’s svarup. 

VADTÃL 
- 614 - 
7.7 
“For example, there is ãkãsh in  the  seed  of  a  tree;  and  when  a  tree 
grows   from that   seed, ãkãsh will   still   remain   within   all   of   its 
branches,  leaves,  flowers,  and  fruits  in  its anvay form.    However, 
when the tree is cut, ãkãsh is not cut along with it; and when the tree 
is  burnt, ãkãsh is  not  burnt.    In  the  same  way, Bhagvãn is anvay 
within Mãyã and the entities that have evolved from it; but, He is also 
vyatirek from  it  just  like ãkãsh.    This  is  the anvay-vyatirek nature  of 
Bhagvãn’s svarup.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 7 || 207 || 
 
 
Vadtãl – 8 
Becoming Like Bhagvãn 
A Spider’s Web 
 
8.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Posh sud 4  [12
th
 January  1826],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  platform  in  front  of  the 
mandir of Shree Lakshmi-Nãrãyan in Vadtãl.  He was dressed entirely 
in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
8.2 
In the sabhã, Shreeji Mahãrãj was sitting in a meditative posture and 
thinking.        Some    of    the munis were    singing kirtans to    the 
accompaniment of a dukad and sarodã.  He gave darshan in this way 
for a short while.  Then, He opened His eyes and said, “Everyone 
please  listen  as  I  wish  to  speak  to  you.    The vrutti of  these  eyes  is 
formless;  but,  if  some  solid  object  comes  in  its  way,  that vrutti is 
obstructed.      Therefore,   that vrutti is   actually physical   and   is 
composed  predominantly  of  the tattva of pruthvi.   When  a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn fixes  that vrutti on Bhagvãn’s murti,  the vrutti initially 
appears  like  a  thin  yellow  rope.    Just  as  a  spider  stretches  its  web 
from  one  pillar  to  another,  and  then sometimes  goes  to  one  pillar, 
then  to  the  other  pillar,  or  sometimes  sits  between  the  two  pillars, 

VADTÃL 
- 615 - 
similarly,  the jeev is  like  the  spider; Bhagvãn’s murti is  one  of  the 
pillars, the antah-karans are the other pillar, and the vrutti is the web.  
Through that vrutti, a meditating yogi sometimes becomes absorbed 
in Bhagvãn’s murti;  at  times,  he  stays  within  his  own antah-karans; 
and at other times, he stays between his antah-karans and Bhagvãn. 
 
8.3 
“While  doing  this,  when  the  yellow vrutti,   which   is   composed 
predominantly of the tattva of pruthvi, becomes predominantly jal, it 
appears  to  be  white;  when  it  becomes  predominantly tej,  it  appears 
to  be  red;  when  it  becomes  predominantly vãyu,  it  appears  to  be 
green;  and  when  it  becomes  predominantly ãkãsh,  it  appears  to  be 
dark.    Finally,  when  the vrutti sheds  the  predominance  of  the  five 
bhuts and  becomes nirgun,  it  appears  to  be  extremely  radiant  and 
assumes the svarup of Bhagvãn. 
 
8.4 
“Therefore, a person who tries to maintain his vrutti on Bhagvãn’s 
svarup in this way should remain perfectly pure.  For example, when 
a  person  wishes  to  offer pujã to  a dev,  the dev accepts  the pujã only 
after the person becomes as pure as the dev.  Similarly, a person who 
keeps his vrutti on Bhagvãn’s svarup should realise his own self to be 
distinct   from   the   three   bodies   (sthul, sukshma,   and kãran),   in 
accordance with the method prescribed in the Sãnkhya shãstras; and 
only   after   attaining ãtmã-nishthã,   should   he   fix   his vrutti on 
Bhagvãn’s svarup.    While  repeatedly  fixing  his vrutti in  this  way, 
when  his vrutti is  eventually  absorbed  into Bhagvãn’s svarup,  that 
state  has  been  defined  as  sleep  for  a yogi performing dhyãn;  but,  a 
yogi’s sleep is never like the state sushupti.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 8 || 208 || 
 
 
Vadtãl – 9 
How Can A Person Experience The Nirgun Bliss Of Bhagvãn? 
 
9.1 
In  the Samvat year 1882,  on Posh sud 8  [16
th
 January  1826],  Swãmi 
Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   mattress   with   a 

VADTÃL 
- 616 - 
cylindrical  pillow  that  had  been placed  on  a  platform  in  front  of  the 
mandir of Shree Lakshmi-Nãrãyan in Vadtãl.  He was dressed entirely 
in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
9.2 
Then,   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   asked   the munis, “Just  as  a  person  can 
experience  the  three  kinds  of mãyik pleasures – rãjas, tãmasi,  and 
sãttvik – in the three mental states, how can he experience the nirgun 
bliss of Bhagvãn?” 
 
9.3 
All  the munis conferred  amongst  themselves  in  order  to  answer  the 
question, but they were unable to do so satisfactorily. 
 
9.4 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Suppose there is ãkãsh alone,  without 
the other four bhuts.  Also, suppose that in that ãkãsh there are many 
moons  as  there  are  stars.    Then,  the  intensity  of  that  light  would  be 
equal  to  the  intensity  of  the  divine  light  of Chidãkãsh.    The murti of 
Bhagvãn is always seated at the centre of that Chidãkãsh. 
 
9.5 
“When  a  person  attains samãdhi of   that   form,   then   even   if   he 
experiences  it  for  only  a  moment,  the  person  who  is  engaged  in 
worship  feels, ‘I have enjoyed the bliss of Bhagvãn in samãdhi for 
thousands of  years’.    This  is  how  a  person  experiences  the nirgun 
bliss  of Bhagvãn’s svarup.    On  the  other  hand,  even  if a  person 
indulges  in mãyik pleasures  for  a  long  time,  he  feels  as  if  it  was  just 
for  a  moment.    Therefore,  the nirgun bliss  of Bhagvãn is  eternal  and 
imperishable, whereas the mãyik pleasures are perishable.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 9 || 209 || 
 
 
Vadtãl – 10 
Realising Bhagvãn In The Svarup Of A King Or Sãdhu 
 
10.1 
In the Samvat year 1882, on Posh sud 11 [19
th
 January 1826],  Swãmi 
Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   mattress   with   a 

VADTÃL 
- 617 - 
cylindrical  pillow  which  had  been  placed  on  a  wooden  bedstead 
under the neem tree outside the mandir of Shree Lakshmi-Nãrãyan in 
Vadtãl.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of munis, 
as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
10.2 
Then, Bhagu-Bhãi Pãtidãr of the village Bhãdran arrived in the sabhã 
and asked, “Mahãrãj, how can the jeev attain kalyãn?” 
 
10.3 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Bhagvãn assumes an avatãr on this earth in 
one of two svarups: the svarup of the king, or in the svarup of a sãdhu.  
When  He  assumes  an avatãr upon  the  earth  in  the svarup of  a  king, 
He  possesses  the  thirty-nine  characteristics  of  a  king;  and  when  He 
assumes  an avatãr upon  the  earth  in  the svarup of  a sãdhu,  He 
possesses the thirty characteristics of a sãdhu. 
 
10.4 
“When Bhagvãn appears  in  the svarup a  king,  He  is  educated  in  the 
sixty-four  sciences,  arts,  and  skills  of  a  royal  household;  the  four 
methods  of  ruling    (reconciling  with  enemies,  suppressing  enemies, 
instigating divisions within enemies, and punishing enemies); as well 
as  the  nine  types  of  sentiments  and  emotions,  such  as  affection, 
humour, sadness, courage, and tranquillity.  However, when Bhagvãn 
appears   in   the svarup of   a sãdhu,   he   does   not   have   these 
characteristics.    When Bhagvãn is  in  the svarup of  a  king,  He  may 
even  take  to  hunting  to  survive  in  times  of  disaster.    He  may  punish 
thieves  by  strangling  them,  and  He  may  also  keep  many  women  in 
His  household.    However,  in  the svarup of  a sãdhu, Bhagvãn strictly 
follows  a  non-violent  lifestyle;  He  would  not  even  pluck  a  blade  of 
green  grass.    Also,  He  would  not  touch  even  wooden  statues  of 
women or paintings of women.  Therefore, the behaviour of Bhagvãn 
in  the svarup of  a sãdhu is  not  the  same  as  that  of Bhagvãn in  the 
svarup of a king. 
 
10.5 
“The thirty-nine characteristics of Bhagvãn’s avatãrs in the svarup of 
a king (Shree Krishna and Shree Rãm) are listed in the first skandh of 
the  Shreemad  Bhãgvat  through  the  discussion  between Pruthvi and 

VADTÃL 
- 618 - 
Dharma.  The thirty characteristics of Bhagvãn’s avatãrs in the svarup 
of a sãdhu (Dattãtrey and Kapil-Dev) are listed in the eleventh skandh 
through the discussion between Shree Krishna Bhagvãn and Uddhav. 
 
10.6 
“Therefore, a person who desires kalyãn should  recognise Bhagvãn 
through  these  characteristics  and  seek  refuge  of  that Bhagvãn.    He 
should have complete faith in Him, and He should perform His bhakti 
while following His ãgnã.  This is the only means of attaining kalyãn. 
 
10.7 
“However, when Bhagvãn is  not pratyaksha on  this earth,  a  person 
should seek the refuge of a sant who has the realisation of Bhagvãn – 
because  the jeev can  also  attain kalyãn through  him.    When  such  a 
sant is not present, He should keep firm faith in Bhagvãn’s murti and 
perform bhakti while  observing svadharma, as  this  can  also  grant 
kalyãn to the jeev.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 10 || 210 || 
 
 
Vadtãl – 11 
The Destruction Of The Jeev 
 
11.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Posh sud  Punam [23
rd
 January  1826], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress  with  a 
cylindrical pillow that had been placed on a wooden bedstead under 
the   neem   tree   outside   the mandir of Shree Lakshmi-Nãrãyan in 
Vadtãl.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    He  was  also 
wearing  garlands  of  white  flowers  around  His  neck.    In  addition  to 
this,  bunches  of  flowers  were  placed  above  His  ears,  and  tassels  of 
flowers were also hanging from His pãgh.  A sabhã of all the munis, as 
well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
11.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “My nature is such that I feel extremely 
afraid   of   harming   any   of   the   following:    Bhagvãn,   a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn, a brãhman, and a person who is humble.  Other than these 

VADTÃL 
- 619 - 
four,  I  am  afraid of  no  one.   This  is  because  even if  a  person  were  to 
harm  anyone  else,  his  body  would  be  destroyed;  the jeev would  not 
be destroyed.  However, if a person harms one of these four, then his 
jeev is also destroyed.” 
 
11.3 
Hearing his, Muktãnand Swãmi questioned, “Mahãrãj, the jeev is said 
to  be  indestructible.    Then,  what  should  one  understand  by  its 
‘destruction’?” 
 
11.4 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A jeev that  attains  a jad svarup,  such  as  the 
body   of   a   mountain,   will   never   attain kalyãn.      This   should   be 
understood as the ‘destruction’ of that jeev.    Therefore,  anyone  who 
seeks kalyãn should  never  harm Bhagvãn,  a bhakta of Bhagvãn,  a 
brãhman, and a person who is humble. 
 
11.5 
“Also, a person should never keep mãn of any sort before Bhagvãn or 
His bhakta.  This is because mãn is the cause of krodh, matsar, irshyã, 
and  slander.    In  fact,  even  the bhakti of  a  person with mãn is said  to 
be  demonic.    Moreover,  if  a  person  oppresses  a bhakta of Bhagvãn, 
then  even  if  he  himself  is  a bhakta,  he  should  be  known  to  be  a 
demon.  My nature is such that I hate even the sight of a person who 
harms  a brãhman,  a  humble  person,  or  a bhakta of Bhagvãn.    Such  a 
person  will  never  attain  my  company,  either  in  this lok or  in  other 
loks.” 
 
11.6 
Having  spoken  in  this  way,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  for  two kirtans to 
be sung.  The first was ‘Mãrã Harjishu Het Na Dise Re, Tene Gher Shid 
Jaiye...’ – why should a person even visit the home of a person who has 
no love for my lord?  The second was ‘Mãrã Vahãljishu Vãlap Dise Re, 
Teno Sang Kem Tajiye...’ – why should a person abandon the company 
of  a  person  who  has  love  for  my  lord?  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  gave  an 
ãgnã that  all satsangis should  learn  these  two kirtans, and added, “A 
person should constantly sing these two kirtans and remember their 
message.” 

VADTÃL 
- 620 - 
11.7 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  got  up  and  sat  on  a  platform  in  front  of  the 
mandir of Shree Lakshmi-Nãrãyan. 
 
11.8 
Gopãlãnand Swãmi then asked, “Why is it that despite reading the 
six-shãstras,  the  Purãns,  and  other shãstras,  the pandits of  the world 
still  do  not  understand  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn and  His sant as  it 
really is?” 
 
11.9 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Though such a person reads the shãstras 
the  Purãns,  he  does  not  have  the  refuge  of Bhagvãn.    Therefore,  his 
jeev has  been  overpowered  by  inner  enemies,  such  as kãm, krodh, 
lobh, irshyã,  and matsar.    These  inner  enemies  never  allow  him  to 
even raise his head.  As a result, the pandits perceive Bhagvãn and His 
sant to be just like themselves.  They think, ‘Just as the inner enemies 
of  within  us  are  never  eradicated,  similarly,  the  same  enemies  are 
probably not eradicated from them either’.  In this way, they perceive 
faults  in Bhagvãn and  His sant.    So,  even  though  they  read  the 
shãstras and Purãns, they fail to realise the greatness of Bhagvãn and 
His sant as it really is.” 
 
11.10 
Next, Shreeji Mahãrãj posed a question to Dinã-Nãth Bhatt and all the 
munis:  “The sat-purush,  who  is brahm-svarup,  behaves  above  the 
three  bodies  and  the  three  mental  states.    Also,  he  does not  believe 
any of the actions of the fourteen indriyas to affect him.  However, an 
ignorant  person  cannot  realise  this.    Only  when  he  attains  a sthiti 
similar  to  that  of  the sat-purush does  he  behave  like  the sat-purush, 
and  only  then  does  he  understand  the  great sant’s behaviour.    So,  as 
long  as  a  person  has  not  realised  the  greatness  of  the sat-purush,  he 
does  not  attain  the sthiti of  being brahm-svarup.    However,  without 
ãtmã-nishthã, a person cannot realise the greatness of the sat-purush.  
Therefore, there  seems  to  be  a  paradox.    Now,  please  example  how 
this paradox can be resolved?” 
 
11.11 
Everyone attempted to answer to the best of their ability, but no one 
was able to give a solution to the question. 

VADTÃL 
- 621 - 
11.12 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Here, allow me to answer.  The answer is 
that when a person develops intense love for a sant who has realised 
the avatãr of Bhagvãn on this earth, he then never perceives any kind 
of avgun in  the sat-purush.    For  example,  when  someone  has  strong 
love for someone, he will never see that person’s avgun,  and  he  will 
always believe the person’s words.  This is natural on the worldly 
path  and  it  is  also  natural  on  the  path  of kalyãn.    Therefore,  intense 
love for the sat-purush is the only means to realising a person’s ãtmã; 
it is the only means to realising the greatness of the sat-purush; and it 
is also the only means to having the direct darshan of Bhagvãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 11 || 211 || 
 
 
Vadtãl – 12 
The Rise And Fall Of The Jeev 
 
12.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Posh vad 2  [25
th
 January  1826],  Swãmi 
Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a decorated bedstead with 
a  cylindrical  pillow  on  a  wooden  platform  under  the  neem  tree 
outside  the mandir of Shree  Lakshmi-Nãrãyan in  Vadtãl.    He  was 
wearing   a   white khes,   and   had   covered   Himself   with   a   white 
pachhedi, over which He had wrapped a rose-coloured shawl.  He had 
tied  a  white pãgh around  His  head  and  was  wearing  a  garland  of 
roses around His neck.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
12.2 
In  the sabhã,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  sat  thinking  for  quite  some  time.    He 
then  opened  His  eyes  and  looked  compassionately  at  the sabhã of 
bhaktas, and said, “Today, I wish to talk to all of you about nishchay in 
Bhagvãn,  so  please  listen  carefully.   Shree  Purushottam  Bhagvãn, 
whose svarup is  forever divya,  is  seated  in Akshardhãm,  which  is  as 
luminous  as  countless  millions  of  suns,  moons,  and  flames  of  fire.  
That  same Bhagvãn assumes  the avatãrs of Rãm and Krishna,  upon 
this earth for the sake of granting kalyãn to the jeevs.  Then, the jeev 

VADTÃL 
- 622 - 
that develops firm nishchay in that Bhagvãn by great association with 
a sant,  progresses  spiritually  day  by  day,  just  like  the  waxing  moon 
on the second day of the bright half of the lunar month.  As the sun’s 
effect on the moon increases, the waxing moon continues increasing.  
Then, when Punam finally arrives, the moon becomes full.  Similarly, 
before developing total nishchay in Bhagvãn, the jeev is as dim as the 
new  moon  of Amãs – only  as  bright  as  a  glow-worm.    Then,  as  a 
person  develops nishchay coupled  with  the  knowledge  of Bhagvãn’s 
greatness, his jeevãtmã progresses and becomes like the full moon of 
Punam.  Then, his indriyas and antah-karans are no longer capable of 
dislodging him from his nishchay.  Regardless of the type of charitras 
Bhagvãn performs,  he  does  not  perceive  any  fault  in Bhagvãn.    In 
addition,  a  person  who  has nishchay in Bhagvãn coupled  with  the 
knowledge of His greatness becomes a brave bhakta. 
 
12.3 
“However,  if  at  some  time  that  same bhakta has  doubts  in  the 
charitras of Bhagvãn, either by the influence of unpleasant kãl, kriyã, 
sang, dhyãn, mantra, dikshã,  and shãstra,  or  due  to  his  identification 
with  the  body,  then  his jeev,  which  was  like  a  full  moon  of Punam, 
becomes like the unlit moon of Amãs.  Therefore, some minor flaw in 
a person will not really harm the jeev very much; but, if he somehow 
doubts the charitras of Bhagvãn, or if he somehow develops a dislike 
for Bhagvãn,  then  that jeev instantly  falls  from  the  path  of kalyãn.  
Just  as  when  the  roots  of  a  tree  are  cut,  the  tree  automatically 
becomes dry, similarly, a jeev who perceives avgun in Bhagvãn in any 
way can never stay without falling from the satsang. 
 
12.4 
“Moreover, a person whose nishchay in Bhagvãn is  weak,  despite 
being in satsang, still doubts, ‘Who knows whether I will attain kalyãn 
or  not?    When  I  die, will  I become  a  dev?    Or  will  I  become  a  king?   Or 
will I become a ghost?’  A person who does not have absolute nishchay 
in Bhagvãn has  such  doubts.    However,  a  person  who  does  have 
absolute nishchay believes, ‘I have attained kalyãn ever since the day I 
attained  Bhagvãn.    In  fact,  whoever  has  my  darshan  or  listens  to  my 
talks will also be freed from all of his sins and will attain Akshardhãm’.  

VADTÃL 
- 623 - 
So,   maintaining   such nishchay coupled   with   the   knowledge   of 
Bhagvãn’s greatness, a person should believe himself to be fulfilled.  
All of you should constantly be aware of this fact.” 
 
12.5 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “Please  sing  the  following kirtans 
describing Bhagvãn’s greatness:    ‘Dhanya  Vrundãvan  Vãsi  Vat-Ni 
Chãyã Re Jyã Hari Bestã...’ – glorious are the shades of the banyan trees 
of Vrundãvan, where the lord often sat’.”  Then, the kirtan was sung. 
 
12.6 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “In the same way as the kirtan, Shree 
Krishna Bhagvãn has also said in the Shreemad Bhãgvat: 
 
aho amee devavarã-marãrchitam pãdãm-bujam te sumanah-falãrhanam 
naman-tyupãdãya shikhãbhir-ãtmanas-tamo-pahatyai taru-janma yat-krutam 
These trees – which are worshipped by the chief dev (Indra) and all the other 
devs – offer fruits and flowers at your holy feet, and bow before you with their 
hands (their branches and leaves) to remove their darkness of ignorance 
which caused their birth as trees. 
 
 “So, even a person who is born as a tree becomes fulfilled by being 
associated with Bhagvãn.  In fact, even the tree under which Bhagvãn 
has sat should be understood to be entitled to attain Akshardhãm. 
 
12.7 
“A person, who does not have such firm nishchay coupled  with  the 
knowledge  of Bhagvãn’s greatness in his heart, should be known to 
be  impotent – no jeev is  ever  going  to  be  saved  by  his  words.    For 
example,  a  king  who  is  impotent,  who  is about  to  lose  his  kingdom, 
and whose family line is about to end, will still not be able to conceive 
a son with his wife.  In fact, even if he summons other impotent men 
like  himself  from  his  entire  kingdom  and  allows  them  to  associate 
with  his  wife,  she  still  will  not  conceive  a  son.    Similarly,  no  one 
attains kalyãn by   hearing   even shãstras like   the   Geetã   and   the 
Shreemad  Bhãgvat  from  a  person  who  does  not  have nishchay in 
Bhagvãn coupled with the knowledge of His greatness.  Just as death 
is  certain  for whoever drinks sweetened milk into which a snake’s 
venom has fallen, similarly, no one can ever attain kalyãn by listening 

VADTÃL 
- 624 - 
to  the  Geetã  or  the  Shreemad  Bhãgvat  from  a  person  who  does  not 
have nishchay in Bhagvãn coupled   with   the   knowledge   of   His 
greatness; only harm can come from it.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 12 || 212 || 
 
 
Vadtãl – 13 
If Bhagvãn Pervades All, How Can He Possess A Svarup? 
 
13.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Posh vad 7  [30
th
 January  1826],  Swãmi 
Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   mattress   with   a 
cylindrical pillow that had been placed on a wooden bedstead under 
the   neem   tree   outside  the mandir of Shree   Lakshmi-Nãrãyan in 
Vadtãl.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes,  and  was  also 
wearing  garlands  of  white  flowers  around  His  neck.    In  addition  to 
this,  a  decorated  umbrella  with  a  golden,  egg-shaped  top-piece  had 
been placed above Him.  Shreeji Mahãrãj sat in such a charming way, 
tossing  a  pomegranate  in  His  hand.   A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
13.2 
Then,  Bhagu-Bhãi  Patidãr  of  Bhadran  approached  Shreeji  Mahãrãj, 
and asked, “Mahãrãj, how does samãdhi actually occur?” 
 
13.3 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “Bhagvãn assumes  an avatãr in Bharat-
Khand for  the kalyãn of jeevs.    When  He  appears  in  the svarup of  a 
king, he possesses the thirty-nine characteristics of a king; and when 
he appears in the svarup of a sãdhu, such as Dattãtrey or Kapil-Dev, he 
possesses   the   thirty   characteristics   of   a sãdhu.      By   appearance, 
Bhagvãn’s svarup appears similar to that of any human; however, it is 
an exceptionally divya svarup.  For example, a magnetic rock appears 
similar  to  all  the  other  rocks  on  the  earth.    However,  there  is  an 
intrinsic magical property in it.  When a ship sails past a mountain of 
magnetic  rock,  all  the  iron  nails  of  the  ship  are  drawn  towards  the 
magnetic  rock.    Similarly,  when  a  person  does darshan of Bhagvãn’s 

VADTÃL 
- 625 - 
svarup with shraddhã,  be  it  the svarup of  a  king  or  the svarup of  a 
sãdhu,  his indriyas are  drawn  towards Bhagvãn.    Then,  he  attains 
samãdhi.   
 
13.4 
“Upon having the darshan of Shree Krishna Bhagvãn, all the residents 
of  Gokul  attained samãdhi;  and  in  that samãdhi, Bhagvãn showed 
them  His  own dhãm.    In  this  way,  whenever  there  is  an avatãr of 
Bhagvãn,  then  at  that  time, Bhagvãn’s svarup definitely  possesses 
certain  magical  powers.    Moreover,  all  the indriyas of  anyone  who 
does darshan of Bhagvãn with shraddhã are drawn towards Bhagvãn, 
and he instantly enters samãdhi.  At the same time, if Bhagvãn wishes 
to  attract  many  people  towards  Him,  then  even  people  who  are  not 
bhaktas, and even animals, attain samãdhi upon seeing Him.  So, what 
is so surprising about this happening to a bhakta of Bhagvãn?” 
 
13.5 
Then,  Muktãnand  Swãmi  asked, “It  is  generally  said that Brahm 
pervades  everywhere.    But,  how  can  something  that  is  pervasive  be 
said  to  possess  a svarup?    Also,  how  can  something  that  possesses  a 
svarup be called pervasive?  That is my question.” 
 
13.6 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Brahm resides  in  only  one  place,  but  not 
everywhere.  That Brahm is Shree Krishna Bhagvãn; He is in all places 
while  still  residing  in  only  one  place.    For  example,  when  a  person 
worships Surya, he grants the person a vision like his own.  Then, that 
person  can  see  as  far  as Surya’s vision  reaches.    Also,  a  person  who 
has  attained siddh-dashã can  hear  people  who  may  be  thousands  of 
millions of miles away as if they are speaking next to him.  In fact, he 
is able to pick up an object that may be millions of miles away, even 
though his arms are the same size as any other human’s.  Similarly, 
when Shree Krishna Bhagvãn wishes to give darshan somewhere, He 
gives His darshan there while still residing in one place.  Even though 
He has only one svarup, He appears in countless svarups.  In fact, if a 
person who is a yogi has extraordinary powers such as long-distance 
hearing  and  long-distance  vision,  then  what  is  so  surprising  about 
Bhagvãn also possessing such powers? 

VADTÃL 
- 626 - 
13.7 
“So, even though the shãstras describe Bhagvãn as  pervasive,  He 
actually   possesses   a   definite svarup.      In   those shãstras,   He   is 
described  as  pervasive  in  the  sense  that  using  His  own  powers,  He 
gives His darshan to all while still residing in one place.  But, He is not 
pervasive  in  the  sense  of  being nirãkãr like ãkãsh.    So,  in  reality, 
Bhagvãn eternally  possesses  a svarup.    It  is  that Bhagvãn with  a 
definite svarup,  who  appears  in  countless  millions  of brahmãnds 
while always residing in Akshardhãm.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 13 || 213 || 
 
 
Vadtãl – 14 
Even A Sinner Becomes Pure In The Refuge Of A Sat-Purush 
 
14.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Posh vad 9  [1
st
 February  1826],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  in  front  of  the mandir of 
Shree Lakshmi-Nãrãyan in  Vadtãl.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from various places, 
had gathered before Him. 
 
14.2 
Then,  Rãm-Chandra Vãghmodiã of Vadodarã asked, “Mahãrãj, why 
does  a  person  who  seems  to  be  an  unworthy  person  still  attain 
samãdhi?” 
 
14.3 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “Everyone  believes  that  a  person  who 
disobeys  the dharma of  his varna and ãshram as  prescribed  in  the 
shãstras is an ‘unworthy person’.  However, if that unworthy person 
sincerely appreciates the qualities of Bhagvãn and His sant, he earns 
great  rewards.    As  a  result,  the  sins  that  he  had  committed  by 
disobeying  the dharma of  his varna and ãshram are  eradicated,  and 
his jeev becomes  extremely  pure.    Then,  when  his  mind  is  fixed  on 
Bhagvãn’s svarup, he attains samãdhi. 

VADTÃL 
- 627 - 
14.4 
“Moreover, when a person abides by the dharma of  his varna and 
ãshram as  prescribed  in  the  Dharma-Shãstras,  everyone  considers 
that person to be someone who is sincere in his dharma.  However, if 
he  criticises Bhagvãn or  His sant,  then  the  result  of  committing  the 
sin  of  criticising  a sat-purush is  such  that  all  the  rewards earned  by 
abiding  to  the dharma of  his varna and ãshram are  burnt  to  ashes.  
So,  a  person  who  criticises  a sat-purush is  a  worse  sinner  than  a 
person  who  has  committed  the  five  great  sins.    This  is  because  he 
who has committed one of the five great sins can be redeemed of the 
sin  by  seeking  the  refuge  of  a sat-purush;  but  there  are  no  means  to 
be  redeemed  for  a  person  who  has  criticised  a sat-purush.    This  is 
because  when  a  person  goes  to  a  place  of  pilgrimage,  he  is  freed  of 
the  sins  he  has  committed  elsewhere;  but  the  sins  committed  at  a 
place  of  pilgrimage  are  totally  irredeemable – it  is  as  if  they  are 
etched in iron. 
 
14.5 
“Therefore, by seeking the refuge of a sat-purush,  regardless  of  how 
terrible  a  sinner    a  person  may  be,  he  becomes  extremely  pure and 
attains samãdhi.    On  the  other  hand,  a  person  who  criticises  a sat-
purush is  still  a  terrible  sinner,  regardless  of  how  sincere  he  may 
seem  to  be  in  abiding  by dharma.    Moreover,  he  can  never  have  the 
darshan of Bhagvãn in   his   heart.      Therefore,   whom   a vimukh 
considers to be a sinner is not a sinner, and whom he considers to be 
sincere in his dharma is not really sincere.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 14 || 214 || 
 
 
Vadtãl – 15 
Religious And Demonic Jeevs 
 
15.1 
In the Samvat year 1882, on Posh vad 11 [3
rd
 February 1826], Swãmi 
Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   mattress   with   a 
cylindrical pillow that had been placed on a platform under the neem 
tree  in  front  of  the mandir of Shree Lakshmi-Nãrãyan in  Vadtãl.    He 

VADTÃL 
- 628 - 
was  wearing  a dagli and  a survãl made  of kinkhãb.    A  rich,  orange 
shelu with  wide,  golden  edges  had  been  tied  around  His  head,  and 
another  orange shelu with  very  wide,  golden  edges  rested  upon  His 
shoulder.    In  addition  to  this,  a  decorated  umbrella  with  a  golden, 
egg-shaped top-piece had been placed above Him.  A sabhã of munis, 
as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
15.2 
Then, Shobhã-Rãm Shãstri asked a question:  “Mahãrãj, there are two 
types  of jeevs:    religious  and  demonic.    Have  they  always  been like 
this since eternity, or have they become like this due to association?” 
 
15.3 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “In  the  beginning,  during  the  period  of 
destruction, both types of jeevs, religious and demonic, are absorbed 
within Mãyã.  Then, when the universe is created, both types of jeevs 
emerge,  each  with  their  own  nature.    There  are  also  ordinary jeevs 
who become religious or demonic due to association with religious or 
demonic jeevs.  Also, there are some religious and demonic jeevs who 
gradually develop such a nature due to the karmas they perform. 
 
15.4 
“However, the main cause of such religious and demonic natures is 
the grace or the fury of a sat-purush.  For example, Jay and Vijay were 
pãrshads of Bhagvãn, but since they insulted the religious Sanakãdik, 
they  attained  a  demonic  nature.    On  the  other  hand,  Prahlãdji  was  a 
demon,  but  since  he  absorbed  the  preaching  of Nãradji,  he  was 
known as a renowned bhakta of Bhagvãn.  Therefore, whomever the 
fury  of  a sat-purush falls  upon,  that jeev becomes  demonic; and 
whomever  a sat-purush is  pleased  upon,  that jeev becomes  religious.  
There   is   no   other   reason   for   becoming   religious   or   demonic.  
Therefore, a person who desires to attain kalyãn should by no means 
criticise Bhagvãn or   His bhaktas.    Instead,   he   should do   only 
whatever pleases Bhagvãn and His bhaktas.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 15 || 215 || 
 

VADTÃL 
- 629 - 
Vadtãl – 16 
The Pleasures Of The Fourteen Loks 
 
16.1 
In the Samvat year 1882, on Posh vad 13 [4
th
 February 1826], Swãmi 
Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   mattress   with   a 
cylindrical pillow that had been placed on a platform under the neem 
tree  in  front  of  the mandir of Shree Lakshmi-Nãrãyan in  Vadtãl.    He 
was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
16.2 
Also  sitting  in  the sabhã was  a shãstri from  Vadodarã.    He  said, 
“Mahãrãj, if you show a miracle to some worldly, renowned man, 
then  its  effect  will  be  very  beneficial  for  the  development  of  the 
satsang.” 
 
16.3 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “I do not get along very well with such 
worldly, renowned men.  After all, they have pride of their power and 
wealth,  whereas  I  have  pride  of tyãg and bhakti.    Therefore,  neither 
of  us  is  in  a  position  to  surrender  to  the  other.    Even  if  I  did  send 
some great man into samãdhi, then at most he would give a village or 
a part of his kingdom, neither of which I have the slightest desire for 
in my heart.  Even if I were to wish for a village or a part of a kingdom 
for  the  sake  of  happiness,  still  when  I  close  my  eyes  and  think  of 
Bhagvãn’s murti;  that  bliss  cannot  be  found  even  in  a  kingdom 
consisting of the fourteen loks. 
 
16.4 
“Also, if there is as much bliss in ruling a kingdom as there  is  in 
worshipping Bhagvãn,    then    why    would    great    kings,    such    as 
Svayambhuv  Manu,  leave  their  kingdoms  and  go  into  the  forests  to 
perform tap?    If  there  is  as  much  bliss  in  women  as  there  is  in 
worshipping Bhagvãn, then why would King Chitraketu abandon ten 
million women? 
 
16.5 
“Compared to the bliss of worshipping Bhagvãn,  the  bliss  of  the 
fourteen loks is  said  to  be  like  that  of Narak.    Therefore,  a  person 
whose  happiness  is  based  on  the  bliss  of Bhagvãn feels  that  the 

VADTÃL 
- 630 - 
pleasures  of  all  the vishays in the  entire brahmãnd are  like Narak.  
Even I feel that the bliss of worshipping Bhagvãn is the only real bliss 
– everything  else  is  full  of  misery.    Therefore,  while  worshipping 
Bhagvãn, if I encounter someone who is naturally drawn into satsang, 
then I encourage him; but there is no type of insistence in my heart.  I 
only insist upon engaging in the worship of Bhagvãn and keeping the 
company of bhaktas of Bhagvãn.  What I have disclosed before you is 
my inner belief.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 16 || 216 || 
 
 
Vadtãl – 17 
The Sevã Of A Bhakta Is Known As Bhakti 
 
17.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Posh  vad  Amãs [6
th
 February  1826], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress  with  a 
cylindrical  pillow  that  had  been  placed  in  the  mansion  facing  the 
mandir of Shree Lakshmi-Nãrãyan in Vadtãl.  He was dressed entirely 
in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of sãdhus,  as  well  as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
17.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked a question:  “Each of the five gnãn-
indriyas and  the  five karma-indriyas have  total  knowledge  of  their 
respective vishays.    Furthermore,  both  a  person  with gnãn and  a 
person without gnãn behave in the same way through their indriyas; 
the indriyas of the person with gnãn do not behave in a different way 
from  those  of  the  person  without gnãn.    However,  the  person  with 
gnãn is  said  to  have  conquered  the indriyas.    How  can  this  be  so?  
That is the question.” 
 
17.3 
Muktãnand Swãmi replied, “It seems that a person conquers his 
indriyas when he attains nirvikalp samãdhi.” 

VADTÃL 
- 631 - 
17.4 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Even a person who has attained nirvikalp 
samãdhi indulges  in  the panch vishays through  the indriyas just  like 
everyone   else;   so,   how   can   he   be   said   to   have   conquered   his 
indriyas?” 
 
17.5 
Muktãnand Swãmi made many attempts to answer the question, but 
he was unable to give a satisfactory explanation. 
 
17.6 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “The answer is that he realises that there 
is  only  misery  in  the panch-vishays (shabda,  sparsh,  rup,  ras,  and 
gandh).    He  also  realises  that  there  are  only kalyãn-kãri qualities  in 
the svarup of Bhagvãn.  He even realises that by indulging in worldly 
vishays,   the jeev is   condemned   to Narak,   where   he   must   suffer 
terrible miseries.  Having realised this, he develops an intense hatred 
towards  the panch-vishays.    There  is  no  way  a  person  will  have  love 
towards  something  with  which  he  has  such  hatred.    A  person  who 
realises  this,  and  then  develops  an  extreme  hatred  in  his  mind 
towards the panch-vishays can be said to have conquered his indriyas.  
As  a  result  of  this,  he  spends  the  rest  of  his  life  offering bhakti to 
Bhagvãn by   listening   to   talks   of Bhagvãn,   singing kirtans,   and 
performing sevã.    However,  unlike  a vimukh,  he  does  not  become 
attached  to  the panch-vishays.  Such  a  person  is  known  to  have 
conquered his indriyas.” 
 
17.7 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked another question:  “Suppose there is a 
tyãgi who has adopted the path of nivrutti.  He realises himself to be 
the ãtmã and  does  not  believe  his  body  to  be  his  true svarup.    Also, 
his  physical  behaviour  is  rather  unusual  and  irregular.    This  man 
does not have any pride of his varna and ãshram.  The way in which 
he eats, drinks, rises, and sits is all rather unusual – it does not seem 
to match the norms of society.  Such a tyãgi does not stay in anyone’s 
company;  he  is  like  a  young,  carefree  deer,  wandering  alone  in  a 
forest.  He cannot be bound by anything in any way. 
 

VADTÃL 
- 632 - 
17.8 
“On the other hand, there is another tyãgi who behaves in accordance 
with  the  path  of pravrutti,  despite  also  having  adopted  the  path 
nivrutti.      When   he   engages   in pravrutti that   brings   out   vicious 
natures,  such  as kãm, krodh, lobh, moh, mad, matsar, ãshã,  and 
trushnã, it also causes a disturbance in his heart.  So, is it appropriate 
for such a tyãgi to continue following the path of pravrutti?  If he does 
remain on the path of pravrutti, how could he remain undisturbed?  If 
you say, ‘If he follows the path of pravrutti by Bhagvãn’s ãgnã then he 
will not become attached to anything’,  then  a  person  can  argue, ‘If 
someone  drinks  bhãng by Bhagvãn’s ãgnã, does that mean he will not 
become delirious?  Of course, he will become delirious’.  Then, how can 
that tyãgi follow  the  path  of pravrutti and  not  become  attached  to 
anything?  That is the question.” 
 
17.9 
Hearing  this,  Nityãnand  Swãmi  and  Shuk  Muni  attempted  to  give  an 
explanation, but were unable to give an accurate reply. 
 
17.10 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “The tyãgi who abides by nivrutti dharma 
only  and  who  behaves  in  an  unusual  way  should  be  known  as  a 
person who has only ãtmã-nishthã.  On the other hand, the tyãgi who 
has adopted nivrutti dharma but also offers bhakti to Bhagvãn should 
vigilantly  adopt  the  path  of pravrutti related  to Bhagvãn and  His 
bhaktas while  staying  within  the niyams prescribed  by Bhagvãn.    In 
fact, adopting the path of pravrutti in order to serve Bhagvãn and His 
bhaktas is the very definition of bhakti. 
 
17.11 
“The tyãgi who has adopted the path of nivrutti and who has only the 
virtue  of  ãtmã-nishthã can  never  be  equal  to  the tyãgi who  has 
adopted  the  path  of pravrutti.    This  is  because  although  he  is  also  a 
tyãgi who has adopted the path of nivrutti, he engages in pravrutti for 
the  purpose  of  being  able  to  serve Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas.   Such  a 
person  should  stay  on  the  path  of pravrutti while  abiding  by  the 
niyams prescribed  by Bhagvãn.    However,  he  should  never  do  more 
than  or  do  less  than  those niyams.    While  discarding  vicious  natures 

VADTÃL 
- 633 - 
such  as kãm, krodh, lobh, moh, mad, matsar, ãshã,  and trushnã,  he 
should   follow   the   path   of pravrutti for   the   purpose   of   serving 
Bhagvãn and His bhaktas.  As a result, he will never become attached 
to  anything.    Compared  to  the tyãgi who  has  only ãtmã-nishthã,  this 
tyãgi is far superior, and it is he who earns the grace of Bhagvãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 17 || 217 || 
 
 
Vadtãl – 18 
Fundamental Facts Of The Swãminãrãyan Sampradãy 
 
18.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  after  the sandhyã ãrti on Mahã sud 1  [7
th
 
February  1826],  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress  with  a 
cylindrical pillow that had been placed under the dome of the mandir 
of Shree Lakshmi-Nãrãyan in  Vadtãl.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in 
white clothes.  A sabhã of the paramhans, as well as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered on all four sides around Him. 
 
18.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Seeing that you are all senior paramhans, 
I shall ask you a question:  Which facts are essential for a satsangi to 
understand?  If someone were to ask him, or if he were to experience 
a  doubt  in  his  own  mind,  then  without  knowing  these  facts,  how 
would he be able to find the solution?” 
 
18.3 
Having  asked  the  question,  Mahãrãj  Himself  continued,  “I  shall 
answer the question myself.  Firstly, a person should realise that our 
sampradãy is the Uddhav Sampradãy, and therefore, a person should 
know its customs. 
 
18.4 
“Secondly, a person should know the line of succession of our gurus.  
He  should  know  that  Rãmãnand  Swãmi  was  the avatãr of  Uddhav 
himself;  and  in  a  dream,  that  same  Rãmãnand  Swãmi  was  initiated 
into the Vaishnav sect by Rãmãnuj-Ãchãrya in Shreerang-Kshetra.  So, 
Rãmãnand Swãmi’s guru was Rãmãnuj-Ãchãrya, and I am Rãmãnand 

VADTÃL 
- 634 - 
Swãmi’s shishya.  A person should understand the succession of gurus 
in  this way.    In  addition,  he  should  understand  the  tradition  of  the 
Dharma-Kul that I have established. 
 
 
18.5 
“Thirdly, a person should know the authoritative shãstras of  our 
sampradãy,  the  names  of  which  are:  Ved,  Vyãs  Sutra,  Shreemad 
Bhãgvat  Purãn,  Vishnu-Sahasranãm  from  the  Mahãbhãrat,  Bhagvad 
Geetã,  Vidur-Niti,  Vãsudev  Mahãtmya  from  the  Vishnu-Khand  of  the 
Skand  Purãn,  and  Yãgnavalkya  Smruti.    A  person should  know  these 
eight shãstras. 
 
18.6 
“Fourthly, a person should know all the niyams which are prescribed 
for all satsangis. 
 
18.7 
“Fifthly, a person should understand Shree Krishna Bhagvãn,  our 
ishta-dev, and also the variety of the svarup of Shree Krishna Bhagvãn 
due to varying locations, followers, and actions. 
 
18.8 
“In addition, the pratyaksha and the non-pratyaksha svarups of Shree 
Krishna Bhagvãn should be understood.  He is non-pratyaksha in the 
sense that Shree Krishna Bhagvãn resides in Akshardhãm in the midst 
of Golok, which is beyond the darkness of Mãyã.  He has two arms and 
is  as  luminous  as  millions  and  millions  of  suns,  while  He  has  a  dark 
complexion.   Rãdhikãji and Lakshmiji are  beside  Him,  and  He  is 
served by pãrshads, such as Nand, Sunand, and Shreedãmã.  He is the 
cause of creation, sustenance, and destruction of countless millions of 
brahmãnds.    He  reigns  as  the  supreme  ruler  of  everything.    This 
Bhagvãn sometimes assumes a svarup with four arms; sometimes, He 
assumes a svarup with eight arms; and He may even assume a svarup 
with  a  thousand  arms.    He  also  assumes  all  the svarups of  the  four 
avatãrs (Vãsudev, Sankarshan, Aniruddha, and Pradyumna); as well as 
the twenty-four avatãrs.  He also takes birth through avatãrs such as 
Varãh, Nrusinh, Vãman, Kapil-Dev,  and Hayagriv,  while  He  actually 
always  possesses  two  arms.    It  is  this  same svarup that  has  been 
described  in  the  Upanishads,  the  Sãnkhya shãstras,  the  Yog shãstras, 

VADTÃL 
- 635 - 
and  the  Panch-Rãtra.    This  is  how Bhagvãn’s svarup is  described  as 
being non-pratyaksha. 
 
18.9 
“Furthermore,  of  all  the ãchãryas that   have   lived, Vyãsji is   the 
greatest.    Even  Shankar-Ãchãrya  cannot  be  said  to  be  like Vyãsji.    In 
fact,  nor  can  Rãmãnuj-Ãchãrya,  nor  can  Mãdhvã-Ãchãrya,  nor  can 
Nimbãrk,  nor  can  Vishnu Swãmi, and  nor can Vallabh-Ãchãrya.   This 
is  because  those ãchãryas will  only  be  accepted  as  respected  in  the 
world   if   they   accept   the   greatness   of Vyãsji’s words; but   not 
otherwise.    However, Vyãsji does  not  need  to  rely  upon  anyone  else 
to be respected.  This is because Vyãsji is the ãchãrya of the Veds and 
is  Himself  an avatãr of Bhagvãn.    Therefore,  we  should  abide  by 
Vyãsji’s teachings only. 
 
18.10 
“That same Vyãsji, for the kalyãn of the jeevs, separated the Veds into 
four parts, wrote the seventeen Purãns, and the Mahãbhãrat.  Still, he 
felt in his mind, ‘I have not been able to carefully explain the methods 
for the kalyãn of the jeevs’.  As a result, he did not feel satisfied in his 
mind.    So,  he  wrote  the  Shreemad  Bhãgvat  Purãn,  which  is  the 
essence of all the Veds, the Purãns, the historical shãstras, the Panch-
Rãtra,  the  Yog shãstras,  and  the  Sãnkhya shãstras.   In  that  Shreemad 
Bhãgvat, He has described Shree Krishna Bhagvãn as greater than all 
the  other avatãrs,  and  that  all  the avatãrs originate  from  that  same 
Shree Krishna Bhagvãn. 
 
18.11 
“In the Gun-Vibhãg chapter  of  the  Shreemad  Bhãgvat, Shree  Krishna 
Bhagvãn says  to  Uddhav, ‘I am nirgun, and whoever comes  into  my 
contact also becomes nirgun’.  That is why all those who came into my 
contact  with Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn – with  whichever  feeling – also 
became nirgun, regardless of whether it was a feeling of lust, hatred, 
fear, friendship, or love.  Therefore, Shree Krishna Bhagvãn Himself is 
nirgun.    This  is  how Vyãsji has  described Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn.  
Also, Vyãsji has  established  the  following  principle:   ‘Shree Krishna 
Bhagvãn  Himself  is  the  Bhagvãn  who  assumes  all  the  avatãrs,  and  all 
other avatãrs are also Him’.  If Shree Krishna Bhagvãn is described as 

VADTÃL 
- 636 - 
being  merely  the  embodiment  of  pure sattva-gun instead  of  being 
described as nirgun, then a person has not grasped the context of the 
Shreemad Bhãgvat and it results in a major misunderstanding.  After 
all,  the gopis did  not  realise Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn to  be Bhagvãn; 
their  feeling  of  lust  for Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn was  their  method  of 
worship  of  Him.    However,  they  still  became nirgun.    Then,  how  can 
Shree Krishna Bhagvãn be described as being merely the embodiment 
of  pure sattva-gun?    Therefore, Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn is  definitely 
nirgun.  In addition, Shree Krishna Bhagvãn Himself has said to Arjun: 
 
janma karma cha me divyam-evam yo vetti tattvataha 
tyaktvã deham punar-janma naiti mãm-eti sorjuna 
He who thoroughly realises my birth and actions to be divya will not take 
another birth when he leaves his body.  Instead, he will attain me. 
 
18.12 
“At the time of His birth, Shree Krishna Bhagvãn showed Vãsudev and 
Devki His svarup with four arms so that they would realise Him to be 
Bhagvãn.    He  also showed Brahmã many svarups with four  arms;  He 
showed  Akrur  the svarup of Shesh-Shãyi  Nãrãyan;  and  He  showed 
Himself in the Vishvarup form to Arjun.  In this way, it is acceptable to 
make  distinctions  in  the  types  of  worship  of Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn 
due  to  differences  in  His svarups.    However,  this  true svarup is 
different. 
 
18.13
 “In Vraj, Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn was  known  as  Bãl-Mukund;  He  was 
also  called  Murli-Manohar,  and  Rãdhã-Krishna;  He  used  to  take  the 
cows  and  calves  for  grazing;  He  lifted  Mount  Govardhan;  He  played 
rãs with  the gopis;  He  went  to  Mathurã  and  killed  Kans;  He  pleased 
the Yãdavs; He studied at the home of the brãhman named Sãndipani; 
He  associated  with  Kubjã;  He  stayed  in  Dvãrkã,  where  He  married 
eight  queens,  such  as  Rukmani;  He  also  wedded  sixteen  thousand 
women; while staying in Hastinãpur, He protected the Pãndavs from 
all  the  calamities  which  fell  upon  them;  He  saved  Draupadi  from 
humiliation;  and  He  became  Arjun’s charioteer.  In this way, there 
were  many leelãs of Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn due  to  differences  in 
locations.  However, from this, a person should not make distinctions 

VADTÃL 
- 637 - 
in the types of worship of Shree Krishna Bhagvãn’s two-armed svarup.  
A  person  who  does,  should  be  known  as  a  blasphemer  of  the guru 
and the guru’s word. 
 
18.14 
“In fact, Shree Krishna Bhagvãn has behaved in many different ways.  
He  has  eaten  the  leftovers  of  the cow-herds  and has even  played rãs 
with  the gopis.    However,  the bhaktas of Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn 
should   not   imitate   His   behaviour.      Instead,   they   should   behave 
according  to  the  characteristics  of  a sãdhu and  abide  by  the dharma 
of  their varna and ãshram.    They  should  offer bhakti to  Him  as 
prescribed  by Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn in  the  eleventh skandh of  the 
Shreemad  Bhãgvat,  the  Bhagvad  Geetã,  and  the  Vãsudev  Mahãtmya.  
However,  they  should  behave  as Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn behaved.    A 
person  who  does  behave  as Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn behaved  is  a 
vimukh, and is not my satsangi. 
 
18.15 
“Just  as  a  person  should  not  imitate  the  behaviour  of  our ishta-dev 
Shree Krishna Bhagvãn,  similarly,  as  I  am  your ãchãrya,  your guru, 
and  your adviser, you  should  not  imitate  my  physical  behaviour.  
Instead,  all  of  you  should  behave  according  to  my ãgnãs that  I  have 
prescribed for those in my sampradãy; but no one should imitate my 
behaviour. 
 
18.16 
“All paramhans and all satsangis should learn these facts which I have 
told  you.    After  understanding  them,  all  should  behave  accordingly.  
Also,  when  speaking with  others,  you  should  tell  them  to  behave 
similarly.” 
 
18.17 
Having  said  this,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  left  for  dinner.    Upon  hearing  this 
talk, all the sãdhus and satsangis understood that the non-pratyaksha 
svarup of Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn whom  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  spoke  of  is 
none other than this Shreeji Mahãrãj, son of Bhakti and Dharma, and 
that  no  one  is  greater  than  Him.    It  is  only  He  who  is  our ishta-dev, 
and it is only He who is our guru. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 18 || 218 || 

VADTÃL 
- 638 - 
Vadtãl – 19 
Becoming A Bhakta Of Bhagvãn 
 
19.1 
In the Samvat year 1882, on the evening of Mahã sud 2 [8
th
 February 
1826],  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress  with  a  cylindrical 
pillow that had been placed in the eastern rup-choki of the mandir of 
Shree  Lakshmi-Nãrãyan in  Vadtãl.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from various places, 
had gathered before Him. 
 
19.2 
Then,   after   the sandhyã   ãrti had   finished,   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   said, 
“Please listen, I wish to speak to all of you about Bhagvãn.  Whenever 
a jeev attains  a  human  body  in Bharat-Khand, Bhagvãn’s avatãrs or 
Bhagvãn’s sãdhus will certainly also be present on earth at that time.  
If that jeev can recognise them, then he becomes a bhakta of Bhagvãn. 
 
19.3 
“Once he has become a bhakta of Bhagvãn, it would be improper for 
him  to  have  love  for  anything  except Bhagvãn.    This  is  because, 
compared  to  the  bliss  of  the dhãm of Bhagvãn,  the  pleasures  of 
worldly vishays are like faeces.  Only worms that live in the faeces feel 
that  there  is  profound  bliss – a  human  would  realise  faeces  to  be 
nothing  but  utter  misery.    Therefore,  a  person  who  has  recognised 
Bhagvãn becomes  a pãrshad of Bhagvãn.    Then,  he  should  not  cease 
to  be  an  attendant  of Bhagvãn by  desiring  to  enjoy  the  pleasures  of 
worldly vishays like worms in faeces. 
 
19.4 
“Also,  whatever  a bhakta of Bhagvãn wishes   for   comes   true.  
Therefore, he is extremely careless when he desires any object other 
than Bhagvãn out  of  ignorance.    That  is  why  a bhakta of Bhagvãn 
should consider the pleasures and delights of the fourteen loks to be 
like  the  faeces  of  a  cow.    He  should  have  strong  love  only  towards 
Bhagvãn and  His bhakta,  by  thought,  word,  and  deed.    He  should 
believe, ‘If a bhakta of Bhagvãn has some desires remaining  in  him 
other  than  those  of  Bhagvãn,  he  will  still  attain  the  status  of  Indra  or 

VADTÃL 
- 639 - 
will   attain   Brahm-Lok.      However,   unlike   worldly   people,   he   will 
certainly  not  pass  through  the  cycle  of  births  and  deaths  or  go  to 
Narak.    If  that  is  so,  then  how  can a  person  describe  the  greatness  of 
Bhagvãn  and  the  bliss  enjoyed  by  a  true  bhakta  of  Bhagvãn?’  
Therefore,  a bhakta of Bhagvãn should  maintain  deep  love  only  for 
Bhagvãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 19 || 219 || 
 
 
Vadtãl – 20 
Janak Rãjã’s Understanding 
 
20.1 
In the Samvat year 1882, on Mahã sud 3 [10
th
 February 1826], Swãmi 
Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   mattress   with   a 
cylindrical  pillow  that  had  been  placed  on  a  square  platform  under 
the neem tree in the darbãr of the mandir of Shree Lakshmi-Nãrãyan 
in  Vadtãl.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    Garlands  of 
chameli flowers were hanging around His neck.  In addition to this, a 
red  umbrella  made  from  fine,  silken  cloth  had  been  placed  above 
Him.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places, 
had gathered before Him. 
 
20.2 
Then,   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   asked   the paramhans a  question:    “Kãm 
evolves from rajo-gun, and krodh and lobh evolve from tamo-gun.  So, 
which  one  spiritual  activity  totally  uproots  the  seeds  of kãm, krodh, 
and lobh? 
 
20.3 
Shuk Muni replied, “The seeds of these vicious natures are burnt 
from a person’s heart only when he attains nirvikalp samãdhi and 
when he sees the ãtmã.” 
 
20.4 
Hearing this, Shreeji Mahãrãj raised a doubt:  “Did not Shiv, Brahmã, 
Shrungi Rushi, Parãshar, and Nãrad have nirvikalp samãdhi?  All were 
overcome  by kãm.    However,  despite  their  attainment  of nirvikalp 

VADTÃL 
- 640 - 
samãdhi,  when  the vruttis of  their indriyas reverted  outwards,  they 
were overcome by the vicious natures, like kãm, and krodh.  For this 
reason, what you have said cannot be the answer to the question.  In 
fact,  just  as  a  person  with gnãn remains  undisturbed  in nirvikalp 
samãdhi,   a   person   without gnãn also   remains   undisturbed   in 
sushupti.    When  the vruttis of  the indriyas revert  outwards,  both  are 
disturbed  by kãm and krodh.    Therefore,  there  does  not  seem  to  be 
any   distinction   between   the   person   with gnãn and   the   person 
without gnãn.  Now,   other paramhans may   try   to   answer   the 
question.” 
 
20.5 
Then,  Gopãlãnand  Swãmi,  Devãnand  Swãmi,  Nityãnand  Swãmi,  and 
Muktãnand  Swãmi  collectively  attempted  to  answer  the  question 
according  to  their  understanding,  but  they  could  not  give  a  precise 
response to Shreeji Mahãrãj’s question. 
 
20.6 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Janak Rãjã followed the path of pravrutti, 
and  yet  he  was  undisturbed.    For  example,  when  a  female tyãgi 
named Sulbhã came into Janak Raja’s court, He told Sulbhã, ‘Though 
you are trying to seduce my mind, by the grace of my guru Panch-Shikh 
Rushi, I have mastered the shãstras of both Sãnkhya and Yog.  So, even 
if half of my body is smeared with sandalwood paste and the other half 
is  slashed  with  a  sword,  both  would  be  the  same  to  me.    Even  if  my 
Mithilã  were  to  burn  down,  still  nothing  of  mine  would  be  burned.  
Therefore,  even though  I have  adopted  the  path of pravrutti,  I  am  still 
unaffected and undisturbed’.    This  is  what  Janak  Rãjã  said  to  Sulbhã.  
Also, Janak Rãjã was said to be the guru of Shukji. 
 
20.7 
“Therefore, the answer to the question is as follows:  A person’s 
indriyas may  be  directed  outwards  and  he  may  be  on  the  path  of 
pravrutti,  but  if  he  has a  firm understanding  in  his heart,  like  that  of 
Janak  Rãjã  ,  then  he  will  in  no  way  become  disturbed  by  vicious 
natures, like kãm, and krodh. 
 

VADTÃL 
- 641 - 
20.8 
“After a person has thoroughly known that which needs to be known 
– this  is  true  and  this  is  false – he  realises  that  except Bhagvãn’s 
svarup,  all  worldly  objects  are  full  of  terrible  miseries,  and  that  they 
are  all  perishable.    Also,  he  realises  himself  to  be  the ãtmã,  distinct 
from his body, his indriyas, and his antah-karans.  After this, there is 
no object that would be strong enough to seduce him.  This is because 
he sees all worldly objects as worthless.  So, even if all the indriyas of 
a  person  in  whose  heart  such  understanding  has  become  firmly 
rooted  were  to  extend  outwards  on  the  path  of pravrutti,  still  he 
would not be disturbed by vicious natures, like kãm, and krodh. 
 
20.9 
“The seeds of vicious natures, like kãm,  and krodh,  in  the  heart  of 
such a bhakta of Bhagvãn will be destroyed, whether he is a tyãgi or a 
grahastha.      Also,   of   all   the bhaktas of Bhagvãn,   he   is   the   best 
Vaishnavs.    So,  being  a tyãgi or  a grahastha is  of  no  significance.  
Instead,  a  person  whose  understanding  is  greater  should  be  known 
as being a greater bhakta than the rest. 
 
20.10 
“The mistake of those like Shiv and Brahmã were  mentioned  only  to 
illustrate that when they encountered unpleasant desh, kãl, kriyã, and 
sang,  even  they  were  disturbed  by  vicious  natures,  regardless  of 
whether   they   had   deficiencies   in   their   understanding   or   not.  
Therefore,  even  if  a  person  has  this  understanding,  he  should  never 
associate  with  any  type  of  evil  influence.    This  is  the  universal 
principle.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Vadtãl || 20 || 220 || 
 
 
|| End of Shree Vadtãl Prakaran ||

AMDÃVÃD 
- 642 - 
|| SHREE SWÃMINÃRAYAN VIJAYTETRÃM || 
 
VACHANÃMRUT 
Shree Amdãvãd Prakaran 
 
Amdãvãd – 1 
Extraordinary Dhyãn 
 
1.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Mahã vad 11  [4
th
 March  1826],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  facing  west  in  the mandir of 
Shree  Nar-Nãrãyan in  Amdãvãd.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.  Garlands of roses were hanging around His neck, bunches of 
roses  had  been  placed  upon  His  ears,  and  tassels  of  roses  decorated 
His pãgh.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas,  from  various 
places had gathered before Him. 
 
1.2 
In  the sabhã,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  sat  in  deep  thought.    He  then  opened 
His  eyes,  looked  at  the sabhã, and said, “I wish to talk  to  all  of  you 
about  a  particular  type  of dhyãn that  has  also  been  described  in  the 
Moksh-Dharma.    I  have  seen  many  great  people  who  have  attained 
siddh-dashã through   this   type   of dhyãn.      In   fact,   even   in   my 
experience,  among  the  countless  types  of dhyãn,  there  are  none 
comparable  to  the  particular  type  of dhyãn that  I  wish  to  tell  you 
about  now.    Just  as  a mantra or  medicine  is  naturally  extraordinary, 
the  type  of dhyãn I  wish  to  describe  to  you  also  has  an  intrinsically 
miraculous nature by which a person instantly attains siddh-dashã. 
 
1.3 
“Now, I shall describe that dhyãn.  A person should perform dhyãn on 
the  sun  in  the  right  eye  and  perform dhyãn on  the  moon  in  the  left 
eye.  Then, while performing dhyãn in this way, the sun and the moon 
begin to appear in the eyes exactly as they are in the sky.  As a result, 
the right eye begins to heat up, and the left eye begins to cool down.  
Then,  the  sun  should  be  envisioned  in  the  left  eye  and  the  moon  in 
the  right  eye.    After  visualising  in  this  way,  the sun,  and  the  moon 

AMDÃVÃD 
- 643 - 
should be visualised within the hruday-ãkãsh.  In addition, the svarup 
of  his  own jeev,  the  observer,  should  also  be  seen.    He  should  also 
perform dhyãn upon Bhagvãn – who  resides  within  the  observer 
(within his own jeev).  At that point, his body, which is full of worldly 
desires,  is  felt  to  rotate  in  the  sky  like  a  pulley  mechanism  used  for 
drawing water from a well. 
 
1.4
 “Eventually, a person who performs dhyãn in  this  way  attains  the 
darshan of Bhagvãn’s Vishvarup form,  within  which  he  also  sees  the 
system   of   the   fourteen loks.      That svarup is   not   seen   as   being 
extremely large; it is seen in the same way that Mãrkandey Rushi saw 
the  entire brahmãnd in  the  stomach  of  the  child svarup of Bhagvãn 
sleeping on the leaf of a banyan tree. 
 
1.5 
“Having  performed dhyãn in   this   way,   a   person   is   able   to   see 
everything  that  is  described  in  the shãstras.    Then,  all  remaining 
nãstik feelings within his jeevãtmã are resolved, and the jeev becomes 
extremely  powerful.    In  addition,  he  develops  a  firm  belief  that 
whatever  is  stated  in  the shãstras is  true.    The  eight  extraordinary 
powers become accessible to a person who performs this dhyãn, and 
his vision reaches as far as the rays of the sun and moon.  In this way, 
countless   extraordinary   powers   appear before   that   person,   but 
because  he  is  a bhakta of Bhagvãn,  he  does  not  accept  any  of  those 
powers.    Instead,  he  performs dhyãn only  on Bhagvãn.    As  a  result, 
the   performer   of   this dhyãn attains siddh-dashã like Nãrad,   the 
Sanakãdik,  and  Shukji.    Therefore, there  are  countless  varieties  of 
dhyãn, but only this form of dhyãn grants instant siddh-dashã.” 
 
1.6 
After  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  concluded  this  description,  Muktãnand  Swãmi 
asked, “Is this dhyãn attained  only  by  a  person  who  practices  the 
prãnãyãm of ashtãng-yog, or can it be attained by others as well?” 
 
1.7 
Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “It does not matter whether a person 
practices prãnãyãm or  not.    Only  if  he  practices  this dhyãn and  is  an 
ekãntik bhakta of Bhagvãn can  he  perfect  it.    However,  people are 

AMDÃVÃD 
- 644 - 
unable  to  walk  this  path.    Therefore,  for  those  who  are  eligible  to 
perform  this dhyãn,  there  is  no  alternative  method  for  instantly 
becoming siddh other  than  the  method  of dhyãn that  I  have  just 
described.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Amdãvãd || 1 || 221 || 
 
 
Amdãvãd – 2 
Performing Pujã After Washing And Bathing 
The Best Bhakta Abandons Worldly Responsibilities 
 
2.1 
In the Samvat year 1882, on Fãgan sud 11 [20
th
 March 1826], Swãmi 
Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   mattress   with   a 
cylindrical  pillow  that  had  been  placed  on  a  wooden  bedstead  on  a 
square  platform  in  front  of  the mandir of Shree  Nar-Nãrãyan in 
Amdãvãd.    He  was  wearing  a  white khes and  had  covered  Himself 
with  a  white chofãl.    He  had  also  tied  a  pink feto around  His  head, 
with  tassels  of  roses  dangling  from  it.    Also,  two  bunches  of  roses 
adorned His neck.  In addition to this, bãjubandh and gajarã of roses 
had been tied around His arms.  In this way, His entire body had been 
decorated with roses.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
2.2 
Then,  addressing  all  the paramhans, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “I would 
like to ask you a question.  Suppose there is a bhakta of Bhagvãn who 
behaves  above  the  influence  of jãgrat, svapna,  and sushupti.    He  has 
shed  the  influence  of  polluted rajo-gun, tamo-gun,  and sattva-gun, 
and  acts  within  pure sattva-gun.    That  is  how  he  worships Bhagvãn.  
Another bhakta behaves under  the influence of  the  three gun but he 
does  have  intense  love  for Bhagvãn.    Of  these  two bhaktas,  who  is 
better?” 
 
2.3 
Then,  the sãdhus replied,  “The bhakta with  love  for Bhagvãn is 
better.” 

AMDÃVÃD 
- 645 - 
2.4 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then questioned, “Now, consider the following:  One 
person   performs pujã of Bhagvãn after   washing,   bathing,   and 
becoming  pure;  and  another  performs pujã in  an  impure  state.    Of 
these two, who is better?” 
 
2.5 
The munis replied, “The person who performs pujã after  becoming 
pure is better.” 
 
2.6 
Hearing this, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “You claim that the person who 
worships Bhagvãn after overcoming mãyik influences is inferior, and 
the  person  who expresses  love  for Bhagvãn with mãyik influences is 
superior.  But, how is he superior?” 
 
2.7 
Since no one could answer the question, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Of the 
four types of bhaktas (ãrta, jignãsu, arthãrthi, and gnãni) described in 
the   Geetã, Shree   Krishna   Bhagvãn had   called   the   only bhaktas 
possessing gnãn His own ãtmã.  Therefore, the person who becomes 
brahm-rup after   having   discarded mãyik influences,   and   then 
worships Bhagvãn, is the best bhakta. 
 
2.8 
“This is because nitya-pralay is the jeev’s sushupti state.  Nimit-pralay 
is Brahmã’s sushupti state.  Prãkrut-pralay is when all the entities that 
have  evolved  from Prakruti merge  back  into Prakruti.    In ãtyantik-
pralay, which is gnãn-pralay, everything up to and including Prakruti 
is  hidden  by  the  light  of Brahm.    Furthermore,  in nitya-pralay,  all  of 
the jeev’s responsibilities  are  absorbed;  and  in prãkrut-pralay,  all  of 
Purush’s responsibilities  are  absorbed.    However,  when  the  creation 
process  is  initiated,  all  three  are  again  engulfed  by  their  respective 
responsibilities. 
 
2.9 
“However, a person who has overcome mãyik influences  by  way  of 
ãtyantik-pralay,  also  called gnãn-pralay,  is  never  engulfed  by  those 
responsibilities again.  If at any time he does assume a physical body, 
then  just  like Bhagvãn assumes  a  body  by  His  own  will,  he  also 
assumes  a  body  of  his  own  will;  he  does  not  assume  a  body  due  to 
Kãl, karma, or Mãyã. 

AMDÃVÃD 
- 646 - 
2.10 
“Therefore,  the  person  who  worships Bhagvãn after   becoming 
brahm-rup is  definitely  superior.    Only  a  person  who  is  a  faithful 
bhakta of Bhagvãn and  possesses  the  characteristics  of  an ekãntik 
bhakta can understand this fact.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Amdãvãd || 2 || 222 || 
 
 
Amdãvãd – 3 
The Branch Of A Banyan Tree 
The Upsham State 
   
3.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Fãgan vad 2 [25
th
 March  1826],  Swãmi 
Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a decorated bedstead that 
had  been  placed  on  the  platform  facing  the mandir of Shree Nar-
Nãrãyan in Amdãvãd.  A pink pãgh, decorated with garlands of roses 
and chameli flowers,  adorned  His head.   A sabhã of munis, as well as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
3.2 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  the  entire muni-mandal, “All jeevs are 
dependent upon the panch-vishays.  Either they physically indulge in 
them,  or  if  physical  association  is  not  possible,  they  think  of  them 
within the antah-karans – but the jeev is unable to remain for even a 
moment without thinking about or indulging in the panch-vishays. 
 
3.3 
“Now, take the  example  of  a  banyan  tree.    Everyone  knows  that  the 
roots  of  a  banyan  tree  keep  the  tree  green.    Even  if  all  of  its  roots, 
except  for  a  few  minor  roots, are uprooted,  the  banyan  tree  will still 
remain  green.    In  the  same  way,  a  person  may  have  outwardly 
abandoned  the panch-vishays,  but  if  thoughts  of  them  still  remain, 
then  those  thoughts  become  a  cause  of  births  and  deaths.    The 
question is how can these panch-vishays not become a cause of births 
and deaths for a bhakta of Bhagvãn?” 
 
3.4 
Muktãnand Swãmi attempted to answer the question, but was unable 
to offer a satisfactory reply. 

AMDÃVÃD 
- 647 - 
3.5 
So, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Here, I shall answer the question.  When a 
bhakta thinks about the murti of Bhagvãn while behaving as the ãtmã 
– independent of the qualities of the three bodies, which are engulfed 
in mãyã – then  by  the  power  of  those  thoughts  of Bhagvãn,  he 
behaves in a state of upsham.  Then, due to the power of that upsham, 
the panch-vishays do not become a cause of births and deaths. 
 
3.6 
“Consider the following  analogy:    When  rivers  like  the  Mahi  or  the 
Sãbarmati  are  in  full  flow  between  their  two  banks,  even  elephants, 
horses,  and  trees  are  all  carried  away;  nothing  is  able  to  remain 
stationary.   Similarly, for a  person  in  the upsham state,  regardless of 
how attractive the objects presented before the indriyas are, when he 
focuses  his  attention  within,  they  are  forgotten,  just  as  those vishays 
seen  in  past  lives  are  forgotten  in  this  life.    Such  behaviour  of  a 
bhakta is known as upsham. 
 
3.7 
“Such upsham is indeed  extremely  important.    Suppose  an  ignorant 
man  and  woman,  who  are  engaged  in  worldly  life  and  who  have 
intense  love  for  each  other  before  marriage,  are  then  married  and 
made to stay awake and walk continuously for three days and nights.  
Then,   when   they   are   united,   due   to   their   fatigue,   they   will   be 
incapable of enjoying the pleasure of each other’s beauty or touch.  
Even  if  they  embrace  each  other,  they  would  sleep  like  logs  tied 
together,  but  would  not  experience  any  enjoyment  from  the panch-
vishays.    So,  if  they  have  no  awareness  of  the vishays due  to upsham 
attained  ignorance  during sushupti,  then  how  can  the panch-vishays 
bind  a  person  with siddh-dashã who  attains  the  state  of upsham by 
performing dhyãn upon Bhagvãn’s murti?  They certainly do not bind 
him.    Therefore,  the panch-vishays are  not  a  cause  of  births  and 
deaths for a person who has attained upsham.” 
 
3.8 
Then,  Nityãnand  Swãmi  commented,  “The  method  you  have 
described  for  attaining  the  state  of upsham (performing dhyãn upon 
Bhagvãn after ãtmã-nishthã) is very difficult.  Please tell us if there is 
another, easier method apart from that.” 

AMDÃVÃD 
- 648 - 
3.9 
Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “A bhakta of Bhagvãn who  deeply  understands 
the  greatness  of Bhagvãn,  and  performs darshan of Bhagvãn, and 
serves Him and His bhaktas with extremely intense shraddhã, attains 
that upsham state. 
 
3.10 
“However, it appears to me that a servant with mãn will not be liked 
by  anyone.    To  have  a  servant  with mãn serve  a  person  is  like  when 
even  the  rich  survive  by  eating kodrã during  a  famine;  having  a 
servant  with mãn to  serve  a  person  is  similar  to  this.    The  master  is 
not  as  pleased  with  a  servant  with mãn as  much  as  he  is  with  a 
humble servant.  Therefore, a person who does whatever pleases the 
master is a true servant.” 
 
3.11
 Shuk Muni then asked, “How can a person without wisdom and 
understanding please his master?” 
 
3.12 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Even though Mulji Brahm-Chãri and Ratanji 
are  not  extremely  intelligent,  they  have  an  intense  yearning  for 
kalyãn.      So,   they   do  indeed   know  how   to   do  whatever   pleases 
Bhagvãn. 
 
3.13 
“Also,  currently,  even  the paramhans and   the sãnkhya-yogi and 
karma-yogi satsangis do not behave in a way that pleases me, like the 
bhaktas of Ayodhyã men and women.  This is because the bhaktas of 
Ayodhyã have  totally  dedicated  their  lives  for satsang.    Therefore, 
nobody  knows  how  to  please Bhagvãn like  the bhaktas of  Ayodhyã.  
Moreover,   these bhaktas of   Ayodhyã are   extremely   trusting;   a 
cunning person can cheat them.  Therefore, if they wish to begin any 
activity,  they  should  be  allowed  to  do  so  only  after  consulting  the 
senior paramhans and  senior satsangi  grahasthas.    However,  they 
should  not  be  allowed  to  do  that  activity  based  on  the  word  of  a 
single person.  In this way, the tyãgis and grahastha satsangis should 
look after the bhaktas of Ayodhyã.  This is my ãgnã.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Amdãvãd || 3 || 223 || 

AMDÃVÃD 
- 649 - 
Amdãvãd – 4 
The Avatãr Of Bhagvãn  
 
4.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Fãgan vad 3  [26
th
 March  1826],  Swãmi 
Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   mattress   with   a 
cylindrical  pillow  placed  on  a  decorated  bedstead  upon  a  square 
platform  facing  the mandir of Shree  Nar-Nãrãyan in  Amdãvãd.    He 
was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A  pink pãgh had  been  tied 
around  His  head,  and  tassels  of  roses  were  dangling  from  that pãgh.  
Bunches of roses had also been placed upon His ears.  In addition to 
this,  several  garlands  of  roses  were  hanging  around  His  neck,  and 
bãjubandh and gajarã of  roses  had been  tied  around  His  arms.    A 
sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had 
gathered before Him. 
 
4.2 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said  to  the muni-mandal and  the bhaktas, 
“Everyone, please listen to what I have to say.  A person should first 
develop a firm belief of the svarup of Bhagvãn.  What is Bhagvãn like?  
Well,  by  His  own  wish,  He  takes  birth  for  the kalyãn of  the jeevs.  
However, having taken birth, He is still beyond birth.  Despite having 
to die, Bhagvãn is still beyond ageing and death.  He is also niranjan, 
and He has no blemish of Mãyã.  In addition, He possesses a definite 
murti and   is svayam-prakãsh;   He   is Parbrahm, antaryãmi,   the 
supporter of countless millions of brahmãnds; and He is also beyond 
Akshar.    His  assuming  and  discarding  of  a  human  body  is  merely  an 
illusion – like  the  magic  of  a  magician.    Furthermore,  He  is  the 
controller  of  the  countless muktas,  including Akshar.    He  is  also  the 
lord  of  all.   That Shree  Purushottam  Nãrãyan,  after  first  taking  birth 
from  Dharma-Dev  and  Murti,  performs tap in Badrikãshram in  the 
svarup of Nar-Nãrãyan. 
 
4.3 
“That same Shree Nar-Nãrãyan assumes the svarup of Matsya, Kurma, 
Varãh, Vãman, Rãm,  and Krishna on  the  earth  for  the  fulfilment  of 
particular  tasks.    Then,  using  His  own  body,  He  helps  other  people 

AMDÃVÃD 
- 650 - 
eradicate their belief of being the body and accept the belief of being 
the svarup of brahm.  In this way, He makes His body and the bodies 
of  other  people  appear  to be  the  same.    For  example,  just  as  after  a 
thorn  is  used  to  remove  another  thorn,  both  thorns  are  discarded, 
similarly, Bhagvãn discards  His  body  like  other jeevs discard  theirs.  
This  event  is  explained  in  the  Mahãbhãrat  through  the  story  of 
Nrusinhji.  When He wished to leave His body, Nrusinhji, through His 
antaryãmi powers, inspired Shiv within his heart to take the svarup of 
a sharabh.    Then,  both Nrusinhji and  the sharabh fought  a  battle  in 
which Nrusinhji died.  Therefore, Bhagvãn independently, by His own 
wish, accepts a human body and abandons that human body. 
 
4.4 
“After hearing the charitras of Rushabh-Dev being  burnt  in  a  forest 
fire, and Shree Krishna Bhagvãn being killed by an arrow striking his 
foot,  the  minds  of  those  with a nãstik belief,  and  those  who  are  not 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn become confused.  They then allege that Bhagvãn 
too  passes  through  birth  and  death  just  like  themselves,  and  He 
receives a human body according to His karmas, and then leaves the 
human body by His karmas as well.  They also declare that only when 
Bhagvãn performs karmas that  do  not  cause  attachment  will  He  be 
released of His karmas and attain kalyãn. 
 
4.5 
“On the other hand, those who have an ãstik mind, and those who are 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn,  realise the  understanding  of  the nãstiks to  be 
wrong.    They  know  the  body  of Bhagvãn to  be  eternal;  and  that  the 
birth,  childhood,  youth,  old  age,  and  death  of Bhagvãn,  as  well  as 
whatever   other   bodily   qualities   He   may   display,   are   merely   an 
illusion.    This  is  because Kãl and Mãyã are  not  powerful  enough  to 
have any sort of influence on Bhagvãn’s body.  In fact, all changes that 
do appear to occur in Bhagvãn’s body are all due to His extraordinary 
powers.    Those  who  are bhaktas of Bhagvãn are  not  misled  by  this; 
whereas  the  minds  of  those  who  are  not bhaktas become  confused, 
just like worldly people become confused on seeing a magician’s acts.  
However, those who are aware of the magician’s techniques are not 

AMDÃVÃD 
- 651 - 
confused.    Similarly, Purushottam Shree Nar-Nãrãyan also assumes 
many    different    bodies    and    discards    them    like    the    magician.  
Therefore, this Shree Nar-Nãrãyan is the cause of all avatãrs. 
 
4.6 
“Those who assume death upon Shree Nar-Nãrãyan will  themselves 
have  to  undergo  countless  births.    The  suffering  of  passing  through 
the  cycle  of  8.4  million  different  life-forms  and  the  torments  of 
Yampuri are  indeed  endless.    Conversely,  those  who  realise Shree 
Nar-Nãrãyan to  be  beyond  ageing  and  death  will  be  released  from 
their karmas and the consequent cycle of births and deaths in the 8.4 
million life-forms.  Therefore, all satsangis and sãdhus of our Uddhav 
Sampradãy  should  not  assume  death  upon  the murtis of Bhagvãn – 
those that have occurred in the past, the current murti, or those that 
will occur in the future.  This principle should be noted by all.” 
 
4.7 
In this way, Shreeji Mahãrãj revealed Himself as the pratyaksha murti 
of Bhagvãn.    All  who  heard  this  talk  strengthened  their nishchay in 
Shreeji Mahãrãj in this same way. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Amdãvãd || 4 || 224 || 
 
 
Amdãvãd – 5 
Dharma, Arth, Kãm, And Moksh 
 
5.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Fãgan vad 4  [27
th
 March  1826],  Swãmi 
Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   mattress   with   a 
cylindrical pillow placed on a decorated bedstead on top of a square 
platform  north of  the mandir of Shree  Nar-Nãrãyan in  Amdãvãd.    He 
was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    Around  His  neck  was  a  large 
garland of roses, and tassels of flowers were hanging from His pãgh.  
With His right hand, He was turning a mãlã made from tulsi beads.  A 
sabhã of senior munis, as well as haribhaktas from various places, had 
gathered before Him. 

AMDÃVÃD 
- 652 - 
5.2
 Then,  Chhadidãr  Kuber  Sinh  asked,  “Mahãrãj,  what  is  the  most 
extraordinary characteristic of Shree Purushottam Nãrãyan?” 
 
5.3 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “No one except Shree  Purushottam  Nãrãyan 
can  control  the nãdis and prãns of  innumerable  beings  and  grant 
them  instant samãdhi;  nor  can  anyone  else  influence  hundreds  of 
thousands  of  people  by  having  them  abide  by niyams;  and  nor  does 
anyone else have the power to control Akshar and the muktas.  These 
are the extraordinary characteristics of Purushottam Nãrãyan.” 
 
5.4 
Then, Kuber Sinh asked a second question:  “Mahãrãj, there are 
countless  millions  of brahmãnds.    In  this brahmãnd,  the avatãr of 
Bhagvãn is  present  in Bharat-Khand,  in  Jambu-Dvip.    But,  please 
explain  how Bhagvãn gives kalyãn to  the  countless  beings  of  the 
other brahmãnds.” 
 
5.5 
Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “The very Bhagvãn that  resides  in  this 
brahmãnd is also the lord of all.  It is Bhagvãn who assumes a body in 
each brahmãnd for the sake of the kalyãn of countless beings.  These 
beings seek His refuge and consequently attain the holy feet of Shree 
Purushottam Nãrãyan in Akshardhãm.    That  is  the  answer  to  your 
question.” 
 
5.6 
Kuber Sinh then asked again, “Mahãrãj, what please identify what 
satsangis should abandon and what they should accept.” 
 
5.7 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  answered,  “They  should  abandon  all  desires  for 
worldly  objects.    Instead,  they  should  develop  desires  related  to 
Bhagvãn.  If they do have desires for wealth, they should think, ‘If we 
worship  Bhagvãn,  we  will  attain  gold  coins,  diamonds,  rubies,  jewels, 
and other invaluable things in the dhãm of Bhagvãn’.  However, in no 
way should they have desires for worldly objects.  If they have lustful 
desires,   they   should   think, ‘If  we  look  lustfully  towards  another 
woman, we will have to pass through the cycle of 8.4 million life-forms 

AMDÃVÃD 
- 653 - 
and suffer extensively.  Even dogs and donkeys indulge in this, whereas 
I have attained the pratyaksha svarup form of Purushottam.  It will be 
a great loss for me if He is displeased’.  After thinking in this way, they 
should abandon such lustful desires and should desire happiness that 
is related to Bhagvãn.  If they have love for the relatives of the body, 
they  should  also  abandon  it.    Instead,  they  should  develop  love 
towards the Bhagvãn’s sant.  They should accept this much. 
 
5.8 
“On the other hand, satsangis should abandon the sense of ‘I-ness’ 
towards the body and develop an attitude of a dãs towards Bhagvãn.  
If Bhagvãn or  His sant have  become  displeased  in  any  way  or  have 
disapproved of a person, then he should discard all cruel feelings that 
he  may  have  developed  towards Bhagvãn or  His sant.    Moreover,  he 
should  realise  his  own  mistake  and  accept  the gun of Bhagvãn and 
His sant.    In  this  way,  a  person  should  always  think  positively,  but 
never think negatively.  That is the answer to your question.” 
 
5.9 
Then,  Kuber  Sinh  asked  another  question:  “Mahãrãj, please explain 
the nature of dharma, arth, kãm, and moksh.” 
 
5.10 
Shreeji Mahãrãj smiled gently and said, “The nature of arth is  to 
accumulate wealth or to fulfil a person’s aim of moksh.    That  is  the 
nature of arth.  The nature of dharma is to use that wealth in satsang 
for the purpose of dharma; but, not spend it for other purposes.  That 
is the nature of dharma.  The nature of kãm is to have only one wife, 
to  have  physical  relations  with  her  only  at  the  appropriate  time,  to 
reject all women in the world by regarding them as a mother, sister, 
or daughter.  That is the nature of kãm.  Finally, the nature of moksh 
is to attentively follow all the niyams of satsang and keep unfaltering 
nishchay in Bhagvãn.  That is the nature of moksh.  That is the answer 
to your question.” 
 
5.11
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then retired to sleep. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Amdãvãd || 5 || 225 || 

AMDÃVÃD 
- 654 - 
Amdãvãd – 6 
The Cause Of All Avatãrs 
 
6.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Fãgan vad 6  [29
th
 March  1826],  Swãmi 
Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   mattress   with   a 
cylindrical  pillow  that  had  been  placed  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on 
top  of  a  square  platform  facing  the mandir of Shree  Nar-Nãrãyan in 
Amdãvãd.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white clothes.    Garlands  of 
roses  were  placed  around  His  neck,  and  tassels  of chameli flowers 
were  hanging  from  both  sides  of  His pãgh.    Bunches  of  roses  had 
been  placed  upon  both  of  His  ears.    In  addition  to  this,  Shreeji 
Mahãrãj had taken a large bunch of roses in His hand and was gently 
rubbing  it  around  His  face.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
6.2 
Then,  after  the  evening ãrti,  Kuber  Sinh  asked  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  a 
question:  “Mahãrãj, please reveal how nishchay in Bhagvãn that  a 
person has firmly established in his heart would never falter.” 
 
6.3 
Shreeji Mahãrãj first commented, “Everyone should hear the answer 
to this question, so please listen attentively.”  He then said, “If a 
person  knows  the  greatness  of  the pratyaksha svarup of Bhagvãn, 
then his belief never falters.  I shall now explain that greatness. 
 
6.4 
“All the avatãrs of Bhagvãn emerge  from  the  very Bhagvãn that  is 
present  in  this satsang.    He  is  the  cause  of  all  the avatãrs and  is  the 
antaryãmi of all.  It is Bhagvãn in Akshardhãm, who is radiant, full of 
countless powers, and eternally has a svarup.  He is also the lord of all 
the lords of the countless brahmãnds; He is even the cause of Akshar-
Brahm.    When  that Bhagvãn takes  birth  on earth  and  adopts  the 
behaviour  of Rushabh-Dev,  He  is  known  as Rushabh-Dev;  when  He 
accepts  the  divine  ways  of  the avatãr of Rãm,  He  is  known  as Rãm-
Chandra; and when He performs the charitras of Shree Krishna, He is 
known  as Shree Krishna.    In  this  way,  whichever  behaviour  of  the 
avatãrs can  be  seen  in Bhagvãn,  it  should  be  understood  that  all  the 

AMDÃVÃD 
- 655 - 
previous avatãrs of Bhagvãn have emerged from Him, and that He is 
the ultimate cause of them all.  If a person understands this, his belief 
never  falters.    But,  if  he  does  not  understand  this,  his  belief  may 
falter.  That is the answer to your question.” 
 
6.5 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then added, “Furthermore, that same Shree  Krishna 
Bhagvãn took  birth  as Shree  Nar-Nãrãyan from Dharma and Bhakti.  
Therefore,  realising  this  Shree  Nar-Nãrãyan  to  be  my svarup, I  have 
installed His murti for the first time here in Shree-Nagar.  Therefore, 
no  one  should  perceive  even  the  slightest  difference  between Shree 
Nar-Nãrãyan and myself.  It is He who is the dweller of Akshardhãm.” 
 
6.6 
Hearing Shreeji Mahãrãj say this, Kuber-Sinh asked further, “Mahãrãj, 
what  is  that Akshardhãm like?    Please  describe  it  and  the bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn that reside there.” 
 
6.7 
Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “It is Akshardhãm which  has  become  the 
dhãm of Shree Purushottam Nãrãyan to dwell in.  That Akshardhãm in 
the svarup of the dhãm of Bhagvãn is eternal in comparison to all the 
other Akshardhãms (the muktas who   have   become   like Akshar-
Brahm).  Within that Akshardhãm, there are several types of palaces.  
Each  palace  has  various  types  of  decorative  balconies  and  terraces.  
There  are  also  many  different  types  of  fountains  and  many  different 
types   of   gardens.      The   gardens   contain   innumerable   flowers   of 
innumerable species, and each one is radiant.  It is so beautiful that it 
cannot  be  compared  to  any  other dhãm.    It  is  also  called Golok.    In 
addition, its splendour is countless times more than the divine riches 
of countless other dhãms. 
 
6.8 
“That dhãm is  also  limitless.    Just  as  there  is  no  limit  to ãkãsh, 
regardless of the direction in which a person looks, similarly, there is 
no limit to Akshardhãm.  Whether a person looks above, below, or in 
the  four  directions,  there  is  no  boundary  to  the dhãm of Bhagvãn.  
This is because it is endless.  If a person were to try to reach its end, 

AMDÃVÃD 
- 656 - 
he   would   realise   that   it   is   endless.      Such   is   the   vastness   of 
Akshardhãm. 
 
6.9 
“Also, the objects within Akshardhãm are  all divya and  composed  of 
chaitanya.  Countless pãrshads, who are also radiant and have a divya 
svarup, reside  in  that dhãm.    They  are  forever  eager  for  the sevã of 
Bhagvãn, who is the antaryãmi of all life-forms.  It is the same lord of 
that dhãm – the   lord   of Akshar and   the muktas, Parbrahm 
Purushottam – who  is  present  here  in  this satsang.    Only  a  person 
who has such nishchay attains Akshardhãm.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Amdãvãd || 6 || 226 || 
 
 
Amdãvãd – 7 
Divine Characteristics Of Shreeji Mahãrãj 
 
7.1 
In  the Samvat year 1882,  on Fãgan vad 7  [30
th
 March  1826],  Swãmi 
Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was having the Vãsudev Mahãtmya read 
on  the medi above  the  gate  of  the mandir of Shree  Nar-Nãrãyan in 
Amdãvãd.    Then,  in  the  evening,  He  got  up  and  sat  facing  east  on  a 
decorated  bedstead  under  the  neem  tree  near  the  gate.    Around  His 
head, He had tied a pink pãgh, and tassels of roses had been inserted 
into the pãgh.  He was also wearing garlands of roses.  In addition to 
this,  He  was  wearing  a  white survãl and  had  covered  Himself  with  a 
thin,  white chofãl.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
7.2 
Then, Prãgji Davé asked, “Mahãrãj, by what means can a person’s 
mind   become   firmly   fixed   on   you   so   that   it   does   not   become 
adulterous by straying elsewhere?” 
 
7.3 
Shreeji Mahãrãj began by saying, “Please listen  as  I  answer  your 
question.”  He then continued, “By realising the greatness of Bhagvãn, 

AMDÃVÃD 
- 657 - 
a person’s mind becomes fixed on Him.  Now, I shall explain how that 
greatness should be understood. 
 
7.4 
“I had previously asked Rãmãnand Swãmi at Lãdhã Brãhman’s house 
in Piplãnã, ‘Are you truly Bhagvãn, or are you merely called Bhagvãn?’  
Rãmãnand  Swãmi  did  not  reply  then.    Later,  in Samvat 1869,  I  had 
fallen ill.  During my illness, I went to Kshir-Sãgar where Shesh-Shãyi 
Nãrãyan rests upon Shesh, and I saw Rãmãnand Swãmi there.  He was 
wearing   a   white dhoti and   had   covered   himself   with   a   white 
pachhedi.  I also saw many others sitting near the holy feet of Shesh-
Shãyi  Nãrãyan.    I  asked Nãrãyan, ‘Who is this Rãmãnand Swãmi?’  
Nãrãyan replied, ‘He is a knower of Brahm’.    After  He  said  this, 
Rãmãnand  Swãmi  merged  into  the  body  of Nãrãyan,  and  I  then 
returned to my physical body. 
 
7.5 
“Then, when I performed antar-drashti, I saw the source of the divine 
sound  of pranav.    While  I  was  looking  at  it, Nandishvar,  the  bull, 
approached me.  I mounted upon it and went to Shiv in Kailãs.  There, 
Garud arrived.  So, I mounted upon it and began to travel to Vaikunth 
and Akshardhãm.      However,   as Garud was   unable   to   fly   to 
Akshardhãm,   I   went   alone   to   the dhãm of Shree Purushottam 
Nãrãyan, which is beyond everything.  There, I saw that it was I who 
was Purushottam; I did not see anyone important, apart from myself.  
In  this  way,  I  travelled  to  these  places,  and  then  finally  returned  to 
my body. 
 
7.6 
“Then, when I looked within  again,  I  realised  that  I  am  the  creator, 
sustainer,  and  destroyer  of  all  the brahmãnds.    In  those  countless 
brahmãnds,  it  is  by  my  divine  light  that  countless Shivs,  countless 
Brahmãs,  countless Kailãs,  countless Vaikunths, Golok, Akshardhãm, 
as well as countless millions of other loks, are radiant. 
 
7.7 
“What am I like?  Well, if I were to shake the earth with the toe of my 
foot,  the  worlds  of  countless brahmãnds would  begin  to  shake.    It  is 

AMDÃVÃD 
- 658 - 
also  by  my  divine  light  that  the  sun,  the  moon,  and  the  stars  are 
radiant.   So,  if  a  person develops  the  belief  of my svarup in  this  way, 
his  mind  becomes  fixed  on  me – Bhagvãn – and  would  never  stray 
anywhere  else.    Moreover,  I  will  grant  my  supreme dhãm to  all  who 
come to my refuge and understand this.  In addition, I will make them 
antaryãmi,   and   powerful   enough   to   create,   sustain,   and   destroy 
brahmãnds.    However,  after  receiving  such  powers,  a  person  should 
not  think, ‘I alone my great’,  and  neglect  and murti of Shree  Nar-
Nãrãyan.  Instead, a person should realise ‘It is by compassion of Shree 
Nar-Nãrãyan that I have attained such greatness’.” 
 
7.8
 In this way, Shreeji Mahãrãj answered the question. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Amdãvãd || 7 || 227 || 
 
 
Amdãvãd – 8 
The Prãyshchit For Anger  
 
8.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Fãgan vad 8  [31
st
 March  1826],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  serving  food  to  the sãdhus in  their 
residential   hall,   north   of   the mandir of Shree   Nar-Nãrãyan in 
Amdãvãd.    He  had  tied  a  beautiful,  white pãgh around  His  head  and 
was  wearing  a  white khes.    He  has  also  placed  a khes over  His  left 
shoulder and had tied one of its ends around His waist.  Also, a large 
garland of roses was hanging around His neck. 
 
8.2 
While  serving lãdus to  the sãdhus, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “A sãdhu 
should  abandon  anger  in  all  respects.    What  is  anger  like?    Well,  it 
destroys all noble qualities such as gnãn, the performance of tap, and 
the chanting of the name of Bhagvãn. 
 
8.3 
“Now, I shall identify the motives from which anger arises.  Anger 
arises  when sãdhus are  engaged  in  a  question-answer  discussion 

AMDÃVÃD 
- 659 - 
amongst  themselves,  or  if  there  is  an  argumentative  discussion.    It 
can  also  arise  from  the  giving  and  taking  of  particular  objects,  or 
when   lecturing   someone,   or   when   a   person   tries   to   maintain 
prejudice towards his shishya.  Also, anger can arise when a person is 
insulted,  out  of  jealousy,  over  where  to  sit  or  not  to  sit,  or  even 
because of the unequal distribution of Bhagvãn’s prasãd.  In this way, 
there are many reasons for anger to arise. 
 
8.4 
“If a senior sãdhu or  a  junior sãdhu becomes  angry,  he  should  first 
perform dandvat pranãm to  whomever  he  has  expressed  his  anger 
upon, and then please that person by speaking pleasant words to him 
in a pleading, gentle, and sincere tone.  This is my ãgnã. 
 
8.5 
“If anyone  else,  due  to  a  cruel  intellect,  has  an  offensive  thought 
towards  a sãdhu,  he  should  confess  and  voice  his  offensive  thought 
by saying, ‘Mahãrãj, I have thought offensively of you’.  Then, in order 
to be forgiven for that thought, he should fold his hands and pray for 
forgiveness. 
 
8.6 
“If a sãdhu becomes  angry  with  a grahastha bhakta,  then  he  should 
verbally  pray  and  bow  down  to  him  from  a  seated  position;  but  he 
should  not  perform dandvat  pranãm before  him.    If sãnkhya-yogi 
women become angry amongst themselves or on karma-yogi women, 
they too should pray verbally and bow down from a seated position.  
On  the  other  hand, sãnkhya-yogi men  should  do  as  the sãdhus do  if 
they become angry upon anyone.   
 
8.7 
“In general, whenever we become angry with someone, we should 
realise that person to be a bhakta of our lord, Shree Nar-Nãrãyan, and 
instantly   abandon   our   arrogance,   bow   down   to   Him,   and   pray.  
However, a person should never maintain an outward perspective by 
believing, ‘I am senior and better than him; whereas he is not senior 
but a mere junior’.    A  person  should  not  entertain  such  a  feeling.    In 
fact,   even   our ishta-dev, Shree Nar-Nãrãyan,   does   not   keep   any 

AMDÃVÃD 
- 660 - 
arrogance  or  anger;  so  as  His  followers  and  the members  of  this 
Uddhav   Sampradãy,   we   should   abandon   all   forms  of   anger   and 
arrogance. 
 
8.8 
“Shree Nar-Nãrãyan will   be   greatly   pleased   upon   anyone   who 
performs  the prãyshchit that  I  have  prescribed  for  becoming  angry.  
As a result, that person’s antah-karans will be purified, and all of his 
vicious natures, such as kãm, krodh, abhimãn, lobh, mãn, and matsar, 
will  be  destroyed.    Conversely,  a  person  who  does  not  perform 
prãyshchit for becoming angry should be thought of as a snake, not as 
a bhakta of Bhagvãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Amdãvãd || 8 || 228 || 
 
 
|| End of Shree Amdãvãd Prakaran ||

ASHLÃLI 
- 661 - 
|| SHREE SWÃMINÃRAYAN VIJAYTETRÃM || 
 
VACHANÃMRUT 
Shree Ashlãli Prakaran 
 
Ashlãli – 1 
The Three Types Of Bhaktas 
 
1.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on Chaitra sud 2  [9
th
 April  1826],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  left  Amdãvãd  with  great  festivity  and 
reached  Ashlãli  in  the  evening.    There,  He  was  accommodated  in  a 
mango  grove  north  of  the  village  and  was  seated  on  a  platform.    He 
was dressed entirely in white clothes.  Also, He was wearing beautiful 
garlands  of  flowers  around  His  neck,  and  tassels  of  flowers  were 
hanging from His pãgh.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
1.2 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then said to Muktãnand Swãmi, Brahmãnand Swãmi, 
and  all  the  other sãdhus, “Please listen, I wish to say something.  
Whoever incompletely realises the nature of Bhagvãn suffers a great 
loss.    That  person  cannot  experience  the  true  bliss  of Purushottam 
Bhagvãn – who we also call Shree Krishna, Shree Vãsudev, Shree Nar-
Nãrãyan, Parbrahm,  and Shree  Nãrãyan – nor  can  he  become  an 
ekãntik bhakta.    Therefore,  a  person  should  strengthen  his gnãn of 
Bhagvãn by great association with an ekãntik bhakta of Bhagvãn who 
has gnãn.  This is because, without the true gnãn of Bhagvãn even the 
prajãpatis and other creators of the universe have to repeatedly take 
birth  along  with  the  creation,  and  then  ultimately  merge  back  into 
Mãyã.    However,  they  do  not  attain Akshardhãm,  the dhãm of Shree 
Purushottam Bhagvãn.      The   reason   for   this   is   a   flaw   in   their 
understanding.” 
 
1.3 
Then,  all  the munis asked, “Mahãrãj, please explain this flaw in their 
understanding.” 

ASHLÃLI 
- 662 - 
1.4 
Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Very well.  Please listen as I explain their flaws.  
First of all, they consider the strength of their own actions but not the 
strength of a person’s refuge in Bhagvãn to  be  instrumental  in  their 
kalyãn.    Secondly,  they  do  not  realise  that  becoming akshar-rup and 
serving Shree  Purushottam  Nar-Nãrãyan is  in  itself kalyãn.  Their 
third   mistake   is   that   they   believe   the   innumerable avatãrs of 
Bhagvãn, such as Rãm and Krishna, to be a part of Bhagvãn.  Fourthly, 
at  the  time  of  a  previous  death,  they  had  a  thought  in  their  minds, 
‘How are the brahmãnds created?  It would be good to see for once’.  
Seeing  their  desire, Bhagvãn engaged  them  in  the  creation  of  the 
brahmãnds.  They will only become brahm-rup and attain the dhãm of 
Bhagvãn when  they  realise  true gnãn by  great  association  with  an 
ekãntik bhakta of Bhagvãn; and only then will they become eternally 
happy.  Therefore, a bhakta of Bhagvãn should desire nothing but the 
sevã of Bhagvãn.” 
 
1.5 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then explained, “There are  three  types  of bhaktas; 
and  they  can  be  recognised  by  their  characteristics:    A  person  who 
worships Bhagvãn with the intention of earning powers to create the 
world  is  known  as aishvaryãrthi.    He  is  a kanishth bhakta.    A  person 
who  worships Bhagvãn only  to  experience  the ãtmã is  known  as  a 
kaivalyãrthi.  He is a madhyam bhakta.  However, a person who has a 
constant  the  singular  determination  for  the sevã of  the pratyaksha 
svarup of Purushottam Bhagvãn is known as a bhagvat-nishtãrthi.  He 
is an uttam bhakta and best bhakta of all.  As all of us have the belief 
of    the pratyaksha    svarup of Shree Nar-Nãrãyan,    we    are    all 
undoubtedly the best.” 
 
1.6 
All  who  had  gathered  in  the sabhã were  overjoyed  hearing  these 
words of Shreeji Mahãrãj. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Ashlãli || 1 || 229 || 
 
 
|| End of Shree Ashlãli Prakaran ||

JETALPUR 
- 663 - 
|| SHREE SWÃMINÃRAYAN VIJAYTETRÃM || 
 
VACHANÃMRUT 
Shree Jetalpur Prakaran 
 
Jetalpur – 1 
The Dvait Philosophy 
 
1.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  about  an  hour-and-a-half  after  sunrise  on 
Chaitra sud 3  [10
th
 April  1826],  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj 
was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  that  had  been  placed  under  an 
ãsopãlav tree in the mansion in Jetalpur.  He was dressed entirely in 
white clothes.  Around His neck, He was wearing several garlands of 
guldãvadi flowers, tassels of dolariyã flowers were dangling from His 
pãgh,  and  two karnikãr flowers  had  been  placed  upon  both  of  His 
ears.    Also,  He  was  playing  with  a  beautiful  lemon  in His  hands.    A 
sabhã of sãdhus,  as  well  as satsangi men  and  women  from  various 
places, had gathered before Him. 
 
1.2 
Then, addressing the entire sabhã, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “Everyone 
in this world accepts some philosophy or other.  There are two major 
doctrines:    One  is  the  Dvait  philosophy  and  the  other  is  the  Advait 
philosophy.    Please  explain  which  philosophy  should  be  accepted  by 
a mumukshu.” 
 
1.3 
Then,  Purushottam  Bhatt  said  in  reply,  “Mahãrãj,  in  the  Advait 
philosophy, by believing their ãtmã to be Bhagvãn, people behave as 
they  please.    As  a  result  of  this,  they  fall  from  the  path  of kalyãn.  
Therefore, a mumukshu should accept the Dvait philosophy.” 
 
1.4 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then raised a doubt.  He questioned, “According to 
the Dvait philosophy, jeev, ishvar, and Mãyã are satya.  But, as long as 
Mãyã persists, how can the jeev attain kalyãn?” 
 
1.5 
Purushottam Bhatt replied, “A person attains kalyãn by performing 
pure karmas.” 

JETALPUR 
- 664 - 
1.6 
Again, Shreeji Mahãrãj raised a doubt:  “The two types of karmas, 
nivrutti and pravrutti,  become  merged  into Mãyã in  the  form  of 
sushupti.    What  is  that  state  of sushupti like?    Well,  just  as  no  one  is 
capable  of  conquering Mount  Lokã-Lok,  similarly,  no jeev is  capable 
of  conquering  the sushupti.    Above  that,  is Mãyã in  its  state  of 
equilibrium,   and   it   is   extremely   vast.      No jeev can   conquer   it.  
Therefore, the means to go beyond Mãyã is as follows:  When the jeev 
comes into contact with the pratyaksha svarup of Shree Purushottam 
Bhagvãn – who  is  beyond Mãyã,  and  who  is  the  destroyer  of Mãyã 
and  all karmas – or  His sant who  has  attained Bhagvãn,  then  by 
accepting their refuge, the jeev can go beyond Mãyã.” 
 
1.7 
After  delivering  this  talk,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  went  up  into  the  mansion 
for  His  meal.    After  dinner,  He  returned  and  sat  on  a  decorated 
bedstead  under  the ãsopãlav tree.    Then,  looking  lovingly  at  all  the 
sãdhus and bhaktas, He said, “In the beginning, when no one honours 
a  person,  imagine  what  his  nature  is  like.    Then,  when  a  hundred 
people  begin  to  follow  him,  his  pride  becomes  of  a  different  type.  
Also,  when  one  thousand  people,  or  ten  thousand  people,  or  ten 
million  people  follow  him,  his  pride  becomes  of  a  different  type 
altogether.  Then, if he becomes like Brahmã, or Shiv, or Indra, and if 
he  is  wise,  he  would  realise, ‘My greatness is not due to this status’.  
What  is  it  due  to?    Well,  greatness  is  due  to  the ãtmã, and  due  to 
association  with  a sant.    This  is  because  even  though  those  like 
Brahmã, Shiv, and Indra are all great, they still crave for the dust from 
the feet of a sant. 
 
1.8 
“So, where does the greatness of a sant lie?  Allow me to explain.  The 
greatness of  a sant is  not  due  to  wealth,  or  objects,  or  any  kingdom; 
his  greatness  is  due  to  his bhakti and upãsanã of Bhagvãn.    Also,  the 
sant has ãtmã-nishthã.  It is due to these qualities that he is great. 
1.9 
“If a person cannot realise this, then he should develop a belief within 
his ãtmã that he should be deeply attached to a sant who has attained 
the pratyaksha svarup of Bhagvãn,  and  he  should  believe  only  that 

JETALPUR 
- 665 - 
sant to  be  his  own  self.    However,  a  person  may  doubt, ‘How is the 
master-servant  relationship  maintained?’  Well,  take  the  example  of 
Gãlav Rãjã.  He wanted to perform a sacrifice for which he specifically 
required  white  horses  with  black  ears.    It  so  happened  that  those 
black-eared horses were at the home of Varun.  But, since that region 
was  beyond his  reach,  he  called upon Garud.    Then,  having  mounted 
Garud,  he  went  there  and  brought  back  the  horses.    So,  does  this 
mean that Gãlav Rãjã’s sevã towards Garud diminished?  No, it did not 
diminish.    Similarly,  the  purpose  of  being  deeply  attached  to  a sant, 
who  is  a  knower  of Brahm,  is  that  he  has  the  ability  of  passing 
through the eight barriers (jad prakruti).  That is the reason for being 
deeply attached to such a sant.” 
 
1.10 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  added  that  all  should  remember  this  principle, 
as it is the very life of everyone. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Jetalpur || 1 || 230 || 
 
 
Jetalpur – 2 
The Characteristics Of A Yati 
 
2.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  in  the  evening  of Chaitra sud 4  [11
th
 April 
1826], Swãmi Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a decorated 
bedstead  that  had  been  placed  in  the  middle  of  the  courtyard  of  the 
mandir of Shree Baldevji in Jetalpur.  He was dressed entirely in white 
clothes, and tassels of dolariyã flowers decorated His pãgh.  Also, He 
had  a  handkerchief  in  His  left  hand  and  was  turning  a mãlã of tulsi 
beads  with  His  right  hand.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
2.2 
Then,  Brahmãnand  Swãmi  bowed  before  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  and  asked, 
“Mahãrãj, please reveal who can be called yati?” 
 
2.3 
Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “A person who firmly follows brahm-chãrya and 
has conquered all of his indriyas should be known as a yati; a person 

JETALPUR 
- 666 - 
who  is  like Hanumãnji and  Lakshmanji  should  be  known  as  a yati.  
When Hanumãnji went to Lankã in search of Sitãji on Rãmchandraji’s 
instruction, he looked at the faces of all the women in Lankã in order 
to  recognise  her.    As  he  continued  looking,  he  thought, ‘This is not 
Jãnkiji...This  one  is  not  Jãnkiji’.  Then, while he was thinking this, he 
saw   Mandodari   and   thought, ‘Could  this  be  Jãnkiji?’  But,   then 
concluded in his mind, ‘Because of her separation from Rãmchandraji, 
Jãnkiji’s body would never be so plump, and she would never be able to 
sleep so soundly’.  With this thought in mind, Hanumãnji turned back.   
 
2.4
 “Then, he doubted in his mind, ‘I am a yati; but, could a flaw have 
developed in me by seeing all these women?’  But, then he reconciled to 
himself, ‘How  can  there  be  any  flaw  in  me?    It  is  because  of 
Rãmchandraji’s instruction to find Sitãji that I had to look at all these 
women’.    He  also  thought, ‘By Rãmchandraji’s grace, no disturbance 
has  arisen  in  my  indriyas  and  in  my  vrutti’.      Thinking   this,   he 
wandered everywhere to look for Sitãji.  In this way, like Hanumãnji, 
a  person  whose antah-karans remains  pure  despite  being  faced  by 
such vicious influences is called a yati. 
 
2.5 
“Moreover, while searching for Sitãji in  the  forest  after  she  was 
abducted, Rãmchandraji and  Lakshmanji  came  to  the  place  where 
Sugriv was seated on the Fatak Shilã.  They informed Sugriv, ‘We have 
come  here  because  Jãnkiji  has  been  abducted.    So,  if  you  know  of  her 
whereabouts,  please  tell  us’.  Sugriv  replied, ‘Mahãrãj, I did hear the 
cries, “O Ram!  O Ram!” coming from the sky.  Also, some items of 
jewellery, which are tied in a piece of cloth, were dropped from above.  I 
have kept them with me’.  Then, Rãmchandraji requested, ‘Please bring 
them here so that we can see them’.  Rãmchandraji took the pieces of 
jewellery  from  Sugriv  and  showed  them  to  Lakshmanji.    First,  He 
showed jewellery worn on the ears, and bracelets worn on the arms, 
but  Lakshmanji  did  not  recognise  any  of  these.    Then,  He  showed 
some  anklets.    Lakshmanji  immediately  exclaimed, ‘Mahãrãj, I have 
never seen Jãnkiji’s body.  In fact, except for her feet, I have not seen any 
other part of Jãnkiji’s body.  The only reason I have been able to 

JETALPUR 
- 667 - 
recognize the anklets is because whenever I used to go and bow at her 
feet every evening, I would see her ankles’.  In this way, despite the fact 
that  for  fourteen  years  Lakshmanji  was  in  their  service,  with  the 
exception  of Jãnkiji’s feet,  he  had  never  intentionally  seen  her  body.  
Such a person should be known as a yati.” 
 
2.6 
Having said this, Shreeji Mahãrãj commented, “This Brahmãnand 
Swãmi is also like that.” 
 
2.7 
In  this  way,  as  the sabhã was  listening,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  greatly 
praised Brahmãnand Swãmi as being a yati. 
 
2.8 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj went to the outskirts of the village.  There, He 
sat  on  a  decorated  bedstead  that  had  been  placed  on  top  of  a  low, 
broad  platform  at  the site  where  the yagnas had  been  performed.   A 
sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had 
gathered before Him. 
 
2.9 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “Please  begin  a  question-answer 
discussion.” 
 
2.10 
Then, Ãshji-Bhãi Patel asked, “Mahãrãj, what is the nature of the jeev?  
Please reveal it to me as it is.” 
 
2.11 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  explained,  “The jeev is achhedhya, abhedhya, 
avinãshi, chetan,  and  the  size  of  an  atom.    You  may  also  ask, ‘Where 
does the jeev reside?’  Well,  it  resides  in  the hruday-ãkãsh,  and  while 
staying  there  it  performs  different  actions.    From  there,  when  it 
wants  to  see,  it  does  so  through  the  eyes;  when  it  wants  to  hear 
sounds,  it  does  so  through  the  ears;  it  smells  all  types  of  smells 
through the nose; it tastes through the tongue; and through the skin, 
it  experiences  the  pleasures  of  all  feelings.    In  addition,  it  produces 
thoughts through  the man,  it  thinks  through  the chitt,  and  it  makes 
decisions  through  the buddhi.    In  this  way,  through  the  ten indriyas 

JETALPUR 
- 668 - 
and  the  four antah-karans,  it  indulges  in  all  the vishays.    It  pervades 
the  entire  body  from  head  to  toe,  yet  is  distinct  from it.    This  is  the 
nature  of  the jeev.    It  is  due  to  the  grace  of  the pratyaksha  svarup of 
Purushottam that a bhakta is able to perceive the jeev as it actually is.  
On  the  other  hand,  others  cannot  even  begin  to  realise  the  nature  of 
the jeev.” 
 
2.12 
Having answered  the  question  in  this  way  and  pleasing  everyone, 
Shreeji Mahãrãj bid “Jay Sachidãnand” to the sabhã and retired to the 
mansion to sleep. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Jetalpur || 2 || 231 || 
 
 
Jetalpur – 3 
Overcoming Vãsnã 
 
3.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  in  the  early  morning  of Chaitra sud 5  [12
th
 
April 1826], Swãmi Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj arrived in the garden 
on  the  western  side  of  the  mansion,  the  place  of  His  residence,  in 
Jetalpur.    Under  a  large bordi tree  within  the  garden,  He  was  sitting 
facing  east  on  a  decorated  bedstead,  with  a  large,  cylindrical  pillow, 
that had been placed on a platform.  He was dressed entirely in white 
clothes.      He   was   also  wearing   garlands  of champã, borsali,   and 
guldãvadi flowers   around   His   neck,   and   tassels of chameli and 
dolariyã flowers  were  hanging  from  His pãgh.    Bunches  of hajãri 
flowers  had  been  placed  upon  His  ears.    In  addition  to  this,  He  was 
playing   with   a   pomegranate   and   a   lemon   with   both   hands.  
Muktãnand  Swãmi,  Brahmãnand  Swãmi,  and  other munis, as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him in a sabhã. 
 
3.2 
Shreeji Mahãrãj first thought for a while, and then said, “Everyone 
please listen, as I wish to speak to you.  For bhaktas of Bhagvãn, there 
is nothing worse than having impure desires.  This is because bhaktas 
who  have  such  impure  desires,  even  if  they  stay  near  me,  cannot  be 

JETALPUR 
- 669 - 
happy.    In  fact,  before  engaging  in  the  worship  of Bhagvãn,  they 
asked, ‘Mahãrãj, please keep us near you’.  However, because they did 
not eradicate their impure desires, they are miserable.” 
 
3.3 
Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, how are those impure 
desires eradicated?” 
 
3.4 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  explained,  “The  method  for  eradicating  impure 
desires is as follows:  Firstly, whenever a person entertains a thought 
which disobeys the rules of dharma that have been laid down by me, 
or  whenever  he  thinks  cruelly  of  a sãdhu or  a grahastha,  he  should 
repeatedly  chant ‘Nar-Nãrãyan, Swãminãrãyan’ aloud.    Secondly,  he 
should   offer   to Bhagvãn the   nine   types   of bhakti coupled   with 
knowledge  of  His  greatness  and  the  observance  of dharma.    As  a 
result, Bhagvãn resides in his heart and destroys the impure desires.  
In  fact,  just  as Bhagvãn freed  the  elephant  from  the  crocodile’s 
mouth, in the same way, this method that I have just revealed to you 
will eradicate your impure desires. 
 
3.5 
“Now, I shall tell you another method which will benefit all of you, so 
please  listen.    A  person  should  never  intentionally  disobey  the  rules 
of dharma related to his vartmãns.  If a person does so unknowingly, 
he   should   immediately   perform prãyshchit for   disobeying   the 
vartmãns. 
 
3.6 
“In addition, a person should realise his own self to be the witness; ‘I 
am  the  ãtmã,  which  is  full  of  chaitanya;  it  is  beyond  all  thoughts  and 
reason.   This  body,  which  is  accompanied  by  the  mind,  is  not  actually 
my true svarup’. 
 
3.7 
“Furthermore, if Bhagvãn smiles  at  someone,  or  if Bhagvãn calls 
someone, or if He performs any other sort of action, he should never 
develop  hatred  towards  Him.    A  person  should  absorb  this  form  of 
understanding.    However,  someone  may  feel, ‘I  have  worshipped 
Mahãrãj  a  lot,  and  I  have  also  performed  a  great  deal  of  sevã;  still, 
Mahãrãj  does  not  talk  to  me.    Instead,  He  talks  to  others  a  lot.    So,  I 

JETALPUR 
- 670 - 
might as well worship Bhagvãn while sitting at home’.  In this way, he 
develops  hatred  towards Bhagvãn.    In  that case, I  could  also  believe, 
‘What does this person have to do with me?’  As a result, that person’s 
future would be uncertain.  However, I myself do not look at anyone’s 
avgun.  In fact, my nature is such that I always look only at people’s 
gun. 
 
3.8 
“Now, I shall tell you how that bhakta should  perceive gun and 
eradicate avgun.    If  he  thinks, ‘What was I like before I came into 
satsang?    Well,  I  experienced  kãl,  karma,  birth,  death,  and  the  cycle of 
births and deaths.  So, how can I develop hatred towards Bhagvãn who 
has  freed  me  from  all  of  that,  who has  made  me  fearless,  and  who  has 
helped me progress by bestowing noble qualities upon me?  How can I 
ignore  His  wishes  and do as I please?’  A bhakta becomes  happy  only 
when he stops hating Bhagvãn by thinking in this way. 
 
3.9 
“In fact, with the body, nothing is greater than to do as Bhagvãn likes.  
That in itself is bhakti.  In fact, only by doing this does a person attain 
Bhagvãn.    That  is  why  vicious  natures,  such  as mãn, irshyã, kãm, 
krodh, and lobh, are all obstacles on the path of kalyãn and should be 
discarded. 
 
3.10 
“Of those vicious natures, mãn is absolutely the worst of all.  Just look, 
a person who has a minor flaw in any other vartmãn still manages to 
survive in satsang, whereas those who had mãn have never been able 
to  survive.    Therefore, sãdhus must  never  allow  any  lapse  in  the 
observance   of   the vartmãns and   remaining   without mãn.      Be 
extremely  vigilant.    Believe  your  own  self  to  be  distinct  from  your 
body.    Offer bhakti to Shree  Purushottam attentively  and  thoroughly.  
Constantly  engage  in bhajan and smaran of Bhagvãn;  its  bliss  will 
equal the bliss of actually having the darshan of Bhagvãn. 
 
3.11 
“Also, in our satsang, a person who is educated in the shãstras is not 
necessarily  great.    Who  should  be  considered  great?    Well,  a  person 
who  considers  all  fourteen loks to  be  as  insignificant  as  a  blade  of 
grass,  due  to vairãgya;  a  persons  who  has  firm  belief  of Bhagvãn as 

JETALPUR 
- 671 - 
He is, just as he has firm attachment to his body; and a person who is 
oblivious to the world in the jãgrat state just as he is oblivious to the 
world  in  the  state  of  sushupti  sleep – such  a  person  is  great  in  our 
satsang.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Jetalpur || 3 || 232 || 
 
 
Jetalpur – 4 
Sevã Of A Bhakta 
 
4.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on  the Chaitra sud 6  [13
th
 April  1826], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress,  and 
leaning  on  a  large,  cylindrical  pillow,  that  had  been  placed  in  the 
south-facing  balcony  of  the  mansion  in  Jetalpur.    He  was  wearing  a 
white pãgh, adorned with a bunch of small flowers, on His head, and 
He  had  covered  Himself  with  a pachhedi of  white  flowers.    He  was 
wearing  a  white khes with  a  border  of  silver  threads.    In  addition  to 
this, His entire body had been smeared with sandalwood paste mixed 
with saffron.  Also, garlands of guldãvadi flowers were placed around 
His  neck.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various 
places, had gathered before Him. 
 
4.2 
Then,  addressing  the  entire sabhã, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “In this lok, 
the jeev attains kalyãn only  by  the  following  means; nishchay in  the 
pratyaksha   svarup of Bhagvãn,   His darshan,   and   His   constant 
remembrance.  After all, it is said in the Shreemad Bhãgvat that even 
those who insulted Bhagvãn, such as Kans, Shishupãl, and Dantvakra, 
attained kalyãn since  all  of  them  had  constant  remembrance  of 
Bhagvãn.    Therefore, kalyãn is  attained  by  constantly  remembering 
Bhagvãn;   and  since  all  of   you   possess  such   remembrance,   your 
kalyãn is assured. 
 
4.3 
“Having said that, you should still follow all the rules of dharma 
prescribed  by  me  for  as  long  as  you  are  conscious  of  your  bodies.  

JETALPUR 
- 672 - 
You  may  claim, ‘If a person has attained Bhagvãn and constantly 
remembers Him, why does he need to observe vartmãn?’  In  reply  to 
that,  consider  the  difference  between  a  person  who firmly  observes 
the vartmãn and  a  person  who  is  slacking  in  his  observance.    Allow 
me  to  explain  that  difference  to  you.    Even  though  both  remember 
Bhagvãn,  the  person  who  does  not  follow niyams can  only  earn 
kalyãn for himself, but he cannot help other jeevs attain kalyãn.  Also, 
he does not become an ekãntik bhakta, nor does he attain the nirgun 
dhãm of Bhagvãn.    Even  though  he  does  not  have  to  undergo  births 
and deaths, he cannot stay in the satsang. 
 
4.4 
“However, all of you are the best type of bhaktas.  In fact, sãdhus such 
as yourselves, who observe niyams, are of a totally different category.  
For that reason, whoever feeds you sincerely will earn the rewards of 
performing  millions  of  sacrifices  and  will  ultimately  attain kalyãn; 
and  whoever  touches your  feet  will  be  freed of  their  sins  committed 
in  millions  of  past  lives.    Anyone  who  kindly  offers  you  clothes  will 
also  attain  ultimate kalyãn.    The  rivers  and  lakes  into  which  you  dip 
your  feet  become  like  places  of  pilgrimage,  and  any  tree  that  you 
have  sat  under  or  eaten  fruits  of  will  also  definitely  benefit.    If 
someone  devoutly  performs  your darshan,  or  is  someone  devoutly 
bows  before  you,  then  all  of  his  sins  are  destroyed.    Moreover, 
whomever  you  talk  to  about Bhagvãn and  whomever  you  inspire  to 
follow niyams related to dharma will attain kalyãn.  All the actions of 
sãdhus like  yourselves,  who  observe niyams,  lead  to moksh.    This  is 
because  you  have  the  firm  refuge  of  the pratyaksha svarup of Shree 
Nar-Nãrãyan Rushi.  That Shree Nar-Nãrãyan Rushi is always present 
in your sabhã. 
 
4.5 
“You may claim, ‘If we have a firm refuge of Bhagvãn, why do mãyik 
qualities still pervade us?’  Then, let me say that it takes me no time at 
all  to  eradicate  the shad-urmi (six  physical  and  emotional  feelings) 
and  the mãyik qualities  from  all  of  you.    In  fact,  it would  take  me  no 
time to enable all of you to recall your countless previous lives and to 

JETALPUR 
- 673 - 
be  able  to  perform  the  creation,  sustenance,  and  destruction,  of 
countless brahmãnds.    Nevertheless,  I  have  kept  you  like  this  and 
have suppressed  your  powers  because  it is  my  wish  to  do so, and  to 
allow  you  to  attain  the  bliss  of  the pratyaksha svarup of Bhagvãn.  
What  is  more,  all  of  you  have  currently  attained Shree  Purushottam 
who   is pratyaksha in   the svarup of Shree   Nar-Nãrãyan Rushi.  
Therefore,  abandon  all  doubts  and  happily  engage  in  worship.”  
Saying this, Shreeji Mahãrãj became silent. 
 
4.6 
Then, Ãshji-Bhãi asked a question:  “Mahãrãj, how is it that a person 
attains kalyãn by keeping hatred towards Bhagvãn?  Please tell us.” 
 
4.7 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “Once  Drupad  Rãjã  wished  to  have  his 
daughter, Draupadi, married.  So that she could select a bridegroom, 
he arranged a grand function in which he invited all the kings.  Dron-
Ãchãrya also came, as did the Pãndavs.  Then, all the kings took turns 
to  try  and  pierce  the  fish,  but  none  were  able  to  do  so.    Then, 
Yudhishthir said, ‘I will pierce the fish’.  Having said this, Yudhishthir 
took   aim.      Dron-Ãchãrya   asked   him, ‘Can  you  see  this  sabhã?’  
Yudhishthir  replied, ‘Yes, I can see it’.    Again,  Dron-Ãchãrya  asked 
him, ‘Can you see your body?’  Yudhishthir  replied, ‘Yes, I can see it’.  
Then,  Dron-Ãchãrya  said, ‘You will not be able to pierce the fish’.    In 
this  way,  four  of the  brothers  were  unable  to  pierce  the  fish.    Then, 
Arjun  stepped  forward.    He  picked  up  his  bow  and  took  aim.    Dron-
Ãchãrya  asked  him, ‘Can you see this sabhã?’  Arjun  replied, ‘No, I 
cannot see the sabhã, and I cannot even see the fish.  Instead, I only see 
the bird attached to the fish’.  Hearing this, Dron-Ãchãrya said, ‘Focus 
on its head’.    Arjun  adjusted  his  aim  and  said, ‘Now I do not see even 
the bird; I see only its head’.    Finally,  Dron-Ãchãrya  said, ‘Now take 
your shot’.    Arjun  then  pierced  the fish’s head.  In this way, if all of a 
person’s vruttis are  focused  on  the svarup of Bhagvãn,  then  he  can 
attain kalyãn even with a feeling of hatred towards Bhagvãn. 
 
4.8 
“For example, when the vruttis of  those  like  Shishupãl  and  Kans 
became completely engrossed in Shree Krishna, they attained kalyãn.  

JETALPUR 
- 674 - 
But, if a person does not know how to hate Bhagvãn in this way then 
he is sent to Narak.  Instead, it is much easier to engage in the bhakti 
of Bhagvãn.    However,  a  person  who  worships Bhagvãn with  such  a 
cruel  intellect  will  always  be  called  demonic,  and  cannot  be  called  a 
bhakta. 
 
4.9 
“Therefore, if a person wants to abandon the evil practices of the 
demons   and   join   the   ranks   of   Dhruv,   Prahlãd, Nãrad,   and   the 
Sanakãdik,  then  engaging  in  the  worship  of Bhagvãn by  offering 
bhakti is far better.” 
 
4.10 
Having  heard  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  speak  in  this  way,  everyone  in  the 
sabhã experienced profound bliss. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Jetalpur || 4 || 233 || 
 
 
Jetalpur – 5 
The Wish Of Bhagvãn 
 
5.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  approximately  four-and-a-half  hours  after 
sunset on Chaitra sud 7 [14
th
 April 1826], Swãmi Shree Sahajãnandji 
Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   wooden   bedstead   facing   north   in   the 
courtyard south of the palace in Jetalpur.  He was dressed entirely in 
white  clothes.    He  had  tied  a pãgh made  from  a  thin,  white  cloth 
around  His  head.    He  had  also  covered  Himself  with  a chãdar,  and 
was  wearing  a  white dhoti.    A sabhã of munis,  as well  as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
5.2 
After  thinking for a moment, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Everyone please 
pay  attention;  today  I  wish  to  talk  to  you about  things  as  they  really 
are.  Specifically, there is nothing greater than worshipping Bhagvãn.  
This   is   because   everything   happens   according   to   the   wish   of 
Bhagvãn.    In  fact,  at  this  moment,  even  the  wishes  of  this sabhã can 

JETALPUR 
- 675 - 
be fulfilled.  By the grace of Shree Nar-Nãrãyan, even my wish can be 
fulfilled.  Allow me to elaborate on this. 
 
5.3 
“Whatever I wish in my mind is fulfilled in this world.  If I wish, ‘May 
he attain a kingdom’, then he will attain a kingdom.  If I wish, ‘May he 
lose his kingdom’, then his kingdom will be lost.  If I wish, ‘Let there be 
this much rainfall here at his moment’, then it will definitely rain here; 
and if I wish, ‘Let there be no rainfall here’, then it will not rain here.  
Also  if  I  wish, ‘May he attain wealth’,  then  he  does  so;  and  if  I  wish, 
‘May she conceive a son’,  then  she  mothers  a  son;  and  if  I  wish, ‘May 
she not have a son’,  then  she  definitely  does  not.    If  I  wish, ‘May he 
contract a disease’, then he will contract a disease; and if I wish, ‘May 
he not contract a disease’,  then  he  will  not  contract  a  disease.    So, 
when I wish for something, it actually happens that way. 
 
5.4 
“Then, you will argue that a satsangi still has to endure joy and pain – 
he  contracts  diseases,  he  sometimes  loses  all  of  his  wealth  and 
luxuries,  and  despite  working  extremely  hard  all  his  life,  he  still 
remains poor.  Well, the explanation for all of his efforts not earning 
rewards  is  that it  occurs  in  direct  proportion  to  his  slackness  in 
engaging  in  the  worship  of Bhagvãn.   Bhagvãn definitely  wishes  to 
assist  him.    In  fact,  if  His  own bhakta is  to  face  the  pain  of  a shuli, 
Bhagvãn will reduce that pain by having him pricked by a mere thorn 
instead.    As  far  as  I am concerned,  I feel, ‘If a satsangi is to suffer the 
pain  of  a  scorpion  sting,  may  I  suffer  that  pain  a  thousand  times 
instead,  but  a  bhakta  should  be  relieved  of  that  pain and  remain 
happy’.    This  is  the vardãn I  had  requested  from  Rãmãnand  Swãmi.  
That is why I pray, ‘May good be bestowed upon all’. 
 
5.5 
“Also, I am always trying to keep the vrutti of people’s minds fixed on 
Bhagvãn.    This  is  because  I  know  everything  about  the  past,  the 
present, and the future.  In fact, while sitting here, I know everything 
that  happens;  even  when  I  was  in  my  mother’s  womb,  I  knew 
everything; and even before I came into my mother’s womb, I knew 

JETALPUR 
- 676 - 
everything.  This is because I am Bhagvãn – Shree Nar-Nãrãyan Rushi.  
Even if a person who has committed extremely great sins comes and 
accepts   my   refuge   and   abides   by   the niyams,   then   in   his   last 
moments,  I  will  grant  him  my darshan and  take  him  to Bhagvãn’s 
Akshardhãm. 
 
5.6 
“Presently, the lord of Akshardhãm, Shree Purushottam, being born of 
Dharma-Dev   and   Murti-Devi,   takes   birth   in   Badrikãshram   and 
performs tap in  the svarup of Shree Nar-Nãrãyan Rushi.    It  is  to 
destroy  the  beliefs  of  the  hypocrites,  to  destroy  any  traditions  of 
adharma and  nurture  the  traditions  of dharma,  and  to  increase 
bhakti coupled with dharma, gnãn, and vairãgya on this earth in this 
Kali-Yug that Shree Nar-Nãrãyan Rushi was born to Dharma-Dev and 
Bhakti in the svarup of Nãrãyan-Muni – who is presently seated in the 
sabhã.” 
 
5.7 
By saying this, Shreeji Mahãrãj filled His bhaktas with joy. 
 
5.8 
Continuing,  He  said,  “The  only  purpose  behind  my  repeatedly 
mentioning  the  predominance  of Shree Nar-Nãrãyan  Dev is  because 
that same Shree Nar-Nãrãyan, who is Shree Krishna Purushottam and 
who  resides  in Akshardhãm,  Himself  sits  daily  in  this sabhã.    This  is 
why  I  speak  of  His  predominance.    So,  realising  my svarup,  I  have 
spent  hundreds  of  thousands  of  rupees  on  constructing  a shikhar-
bandh mandir in Amdãvãd.  That is why I first installed the murtis of 
Shree Nar-Nãrãyan in  that mandir.  That Shree  Nar-Nãrãyan is  the 
lord of countless brahmãnds.  Of these, He is especially the lord of this 
Bharat-Khand.      Those   people   in Bharat-Khand who   ignore   this 
pratyaksha  svarup of Shree Nar-Nãrãyan by  worshipping  other devs 
are  like  adulterous  women  who  leave  their  husbands  and  become 
attached  to  other  lovers.   Even  the Shreemad  Bhãgvat  mentions  that 
Shree Nar-Nãrãyan is the lord of this Bharat-Khand. 
 
5.9 
“Furthermore, it is for the kalyãn of  the jeevs that  I  have  taken  birth 
on earth along with the sãdhus.  Therefore, if you abide by my words, 

JETALPUR 
- 677 - 
I  will  take  all  of  you  to  the dhãm from  which  I  have  come.    So,  you 
should  also  realise, ‘We have already attained kalyãn’.    Furthermore, 
if you keep firm faith in me and do as I say, then even if you were to 
suffer  extreme  suffering,  or  even  if  you  were  to  face  the  distress  of 
seven consecutive famines, I will protect you from them.  Even if you 
were  made  to  suffer  miseries  from  which  there  seems  to  be  no  way 
out,  I  will  still  protect  you – but  only  if  you  thoroughly  follow  the 
dharma of  my satsang,  and  only  if  you  continue  practising satsang.  
However,  if  you  do  not,  you  will  suffer  terrible  miseries,  and  I  will 
have nothing to do with you. 
 
5.10 
“This time, I  have  left  no  deficiency  in  any  matter  whatsoever.    Just 
look,  I  have  performed  several yagnas in  the  village  of  Jetalpur.    I 
have also been visiting here for so many years; I must have bathed in 
this lake along with my sãdhus thousands of times; I have must have 
visited  each  home  in  this  village  of  Jetalpur  a  hundred  times,  and  I 
have  also  taken  meals  in  every  home.    In  this  way,  I  have  made  this 
village and its outskirts even more sacred than Vrundãvan.” 
 
5.11 
As  Mahãrãj  was  saying  this,  a  large  ball  of light  appeared  in  the  sky, 
and then split into three distinct balls.  They then hovered about the 
mansion for a while and then disappeared. 
 
5.12 
Seeing this phenomenon, everyone asked, “Mahãrãj, what was that?” 
 
5.13 
Shreeji Mahãrãj revealed, “Everyday, Brahmã, Vishnu,  and Shiv come 
for my darshan and the darshan of this sabhã of sãdhus.  But today, by 
the wish of Bhagvãn, you have been able to see them along with their 
vimãns.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Jetalpur || 5 || 234 || 
 
 
|| End of Shree Jetalpur Prakaran ||

GADHADÃ III 
- 678 - 
|| SHREE SWÃMINÃRAYAN VIJAYTETRÃM || 
 
VACHANÃMRUT 
Shree Gadhadã Antya Prakaran 
 
Gadhadã III – 1 
The Shikshãpatri 
 
1.1 
In the Samvat year 1882, on Vaishãkh vad 11 [1
st
 June 1826], Swãmi 
Shree Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   mattress   with   a 
cylindrical  pillow  that  had  been  placed  upon  a  beautifully  coloured, 
decorated cot.   The  bedstead  rested  on  the  high  veranda  outside  the 
west-facing  rooms  in  the  courtyard  of  the mandir of Shree  Vãsudev-
Nãrãyan in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed 
entirely   in   white   clothes.      Beautiful   tassels   of mogrã flowers 
decorated the large, white pãgh that was tied around His head.  Also, 
a garland of mogrã flowers was hanging around His neck, and a string 
of   flowers   decorated   His   wrists.      A sabhã of munis,   as   well 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
1.2 
Then,    Shreeji    Mahãrãj    asked    the paramhans,  “What  is  the 
understanding of a bhakta who experiences no obstacles in his bhakti 
towards Bhagvãn, despite facing unpleasant circumstances?” 
 
1.3 
The paramhans replied  according  to  their  understanding,  but  they 
were unable to provide a precise answer. 
 
1.4 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “A person who  worships Bhagvãn needs 
firm vairãgya, and ãtmã-nishthã.  If vairãgya is lacking, then when he 
obtains desired objects, he will also develop love for those objects in 
the  same  way  that  he  has  love  for Bhagvãn.    If ãtmã-nishthã is 
lacking,   then   when   the body   experiences   pain   or   pleasure,   that 
bhakta’s vruttis become   disturbed.      Then,   he   develops   love   for 
anything  he  considers  to  be  full  of  happiness,  and  hates  anything  he 

GADHADÃ III 
- 679 - 
considers  to  be  full  of  misery.    In  this  way,  his  mind  becomes 
polluted.  Therefore, a bhakta of Bhagvãn needs extremely firm ãtmã-
nishthã as well as extremely firm vairãgya. 
 
1.5 
“This is because, by vairãgya,  all  worldly  forms  except  for Bhagvãn’s 
murti are proven false; and through ãtmã-nishthã, worldly pleasures 
and miseries are proven false.  A person who does not have the ãtmã-
nishthã and vairãgya, even though he has attained nirvikalp samãdhi, 
experiences  happiness  and  peace  only  while  he  remains  in samãdhi.  
But,   when   he   comes   out   of samãdhi,   he   becomes   attached   to 
pleasurable object upon seeing them, as Nãrãyan-Dãs did.” 
 
1.6 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “A bhakta of Bhagvãn either  has  the 
strength of gnãn or the strength of love towards Bhagvãn.  Of these, a 
person  who  has  the  strength  of gnãn understands  the  greatness  of 
Bhagvãn and  cannot  stay  without Bhagvãn even  for  a  moment.    For 
example,    Jhinã-Bhãi,    Dev-Rãm,    and    Prabhã-Shankar    have    the 
strength  of gnãn.    Such bhaktas who  understand  the  greatness  of 
Bhagvãn should  be  known  as  having  the strength of gnãn.    A bhakta 
who has love for Bhagvãn, like the gopis of Vraj, should be known as 
having the strength of love. 
 
1.7 
“Of these, a person who has the strength of gnãn realises Bhagvãn as 
being antaryãmi and  believes, ‘Bhagvãn does not make judgements 
based  on  what  He  hears  from  others.    Instead,  Bhagvãn  recognises  a 
bhakta’s strengths and speaks to him accordingly, but He does not act 
based on the advice of others’.    Conversely,  a  person  who  believes, 
‘Bhagvãn lectures me based on someone else’s words, even though I am 
not at fault’, has no gnãn of Bhagvãn. 
 
1.8 
“Even in worldly life we notice that a person who has selfish motives 
of gaining something from another will never see the other person’s 
faults.  This is because his love is based on self-interest.  Similarly, if a 
person has the self-interest that Bhagvãn will free him from the fear 
of  births  and  deaths,  then  he  will  never  perceive  faults  in Bhagvãn.  

GADHADÃ III 
- 680 - 
But, a person who perceives faults in Bhagvãn by thinking, ‘Bhagvãn 
changes His opinion based on the prompting of others’, has neither the 
strength of gnãn nor the strength of love.” 
 
1.9 
Having  said  this,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said  to  the  senior paramhans, 
“Please reveal which of these two is your strength.” 
 
1.10 
All the paramhans replied, “We have the strength of gnãn.” 
 
1.11 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj continued, “A person who has the strength of 
love will do anything for his loved one, even that which is not fit to be 
done.    For  example,  in  the  world,  thieves  have  love  for  their  wives 
and children.  However, when they go to steal, they kill other people 
and  pass  on  the  money  to  their  own  family.    In  reality,  that  thief  is 
quite  cruel,  but  since  he  has  love  for  his  own  family,  he  is  not  cruel 
towards them.  Similarly, a person who has love for Bhagvãn and His 
bhaktas can  never  become  angry  at  or  jealous  of Bhagvãn or  His 
bhaktas,  and  in  no  way  does  he  perceive  faults  to  them.    A  person 
who has such love can be said to have the strength of love.  A person 
with neither the strength of gnãn nor the strength of love is said to be 
fickle and unpredictable.” 
 
1.12 
Having delivered this talk, Shreeji Mahãrãj returned to His residence. 
 
1.13 
On  the  evening  of  that  same  day,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  seated  on  a 
mattress with a cylindrical pillow placed on a decorated bedstead on 
the veranda outside the east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr.  
He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    He  was  also  wearing  a 
garland of mogrã flowers around His neck.  A sabhã of munis, as well 
as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered  before  Him.    Some 
sãdhus were  singing kirtans to  the  accompaniment  of  a dukad and 
sarodã. 
 
1.14 
When the sãdhus had finished singing, Shreeji Mahãrãj addressed the 
sabhã:  “The Shikshãpatri which I have written should be read daily 

GADHADÃ III 
- 681 - 
by all of my followers – tyãgi sãdhus and brahm-chãris, as well as all 
male  and  female grahasthas.    Those  who  do  not  know  how  to  read 
should  listen  to it  daily;  and  those  who  do  not  have  the  facility  to 
listen   to   it   should   worship   it   daily.      I   have   stated   this   in   the 
Shikshãpatri itself.  A person should do upvãs on the day he fails to do 
any of the three.  This is my ãgnã.” 
 
1.15 
Then,  everyone  promised  to  follow  this ãgnã of  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  by 
saying, “O Mahãrãj, we will do as you have said.” 
 
1.16 
Hearing   this,   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   became   extremely   pleased.      He 
embraced  all  the sãdhus and brahm-chãris and  imprinted  His  holy 
footprints on the chests of all the satsangis. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III || 1 || 235 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 2 
Understanding Bhagvãn’s Greatness 
 
2.1 
In  the Samvat year  1882,  on  the  evening  of Jyeshth sud 6  [11
th
 June 
1826],  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  low, 
wooden   seat   in   the   courtyard   of   the mandir or Shree   Vãsudev-
Nãrãyan  in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  wearing  a 
white khes and had covered Himself with a white chãdar.  He had also 
tied  a  black-bordered,  white pãgh around  His  head,  and  tassels  of 
mogrã flowers  had  been  inserted  in  the pãgh.    A sabhã of munis,  as 
well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
2.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj posed a question:  “A person  sees  that  the 
world  is  perishable  and  that  the chaitanya separates  from  the  body 
and  leaves  it;  however,  the  predominance  of  the  world  does  not 
diminish from his heart.  Despite thoroughly believing Bhagvãn to be 
an  ocean  of  bliss,  his  mind  still  does not  focus  on Bhagvãn.    Also, 

GADHADÃ III 
- 682 - 
satsang does  not  become  predominant  in  his  heart  and  he  cannot 
eradicate  love  for  wealth,  women,  and  other  pleasures  of  the  world.  
What can be the reason for this?” 
 
2.3 
Then, Muktãnand Swãmi replied, “The person lacks vairãgya.    As  a 
result,  he  cannot  eradicate  the  predominance  of  the  world  from  his 
heart, and nor can he develop love for Bhagvãn.” 
 
2.4 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then clarified, “It is true that there is a deficiency in 
vairãgya,  but  it  appears  to  me  that  the  strength  which  forms  as  a 
person practices satsang, remains as it is forever; a different strength 
does   not   develop.      By   practicing satsang,   that   strength   may   be 
nourished,  but  the  strength  itself  remains  unchanged.    Whenever  a 
person’s strength is being formed, his mind becomes disturbed in the 
process of formation.  Just as the mind of an extremely lustful person 
is  disoriented  by  lust,  and  the  mind  of  an  extremely  angry  person  is 
disoriented by anger, and the mind of an extremely greedy person is 
disoriented by greed, similarly, a person’s mind becomes disoriented 
in   the   process   of   developing   his   strength.      Then,   during   the 
disturbance,   whichever   strength   develops   is   the   strength   that 
remains.    Therefore,  a  person  who  is  wise  should  realise  his  own 
strength.    When  a person  is  disturbed  by  the  influence  of  vicious 
natures, such as lust or anger, if he thinks about his own strength, the 
influence of the vicious natures is lessened. 
 
2.5 
“In addition, just as a grahastha feels  regretful  if  he  experiences 
lustful  thoughts on  seeing  his  attractive  mother,  sister,  or  daughter, 
similarly,  a  person  should  feel  regretful  when  objects  other  than 
satsang become  predominant  in  his  heart.    If  a  person  does  not  feel 
similarly regretful on entertaining thoughts for indecent objects, then 
satsang does not remain predominant in his heart.   
 
2.6 
“In  fact,  the  reward  of  all  spiritual  activities  is satsang.    In  the 
eleventh skandh of  the  Shreemad  Bhãgvat, Shree Krishna Bhagvãn 
says  to  Uddhav, ‘I am not as pleased by ashtãng-yog,  thoughts of 

GADHADÃ III 
- 683 - 
sãnkhya,  scriptural  study,  tap,  tyãg,  yog,  yagna,  and  vrats,  as  I  am 
pleased by satsang’.  In fact, it appears to me that all sanskãrs a person 
has   gathered   from   previous   lives   have   been   attained   through 
association with a sat-purush.  Even today, those who obtain sanskãrs 
do  so  through  association  with  a sat-purush.    A  person  who  has 
attained  the  association  of  such  a sat-purush,  but  is  still  unable  to 
understand  matters  as  they  really  are  should  be  known  to  have  an 
extremely dull intellect. 
 
2.7 
“As for me, I consider this sabhã of satsangis to be far greater than the 
sabhãs in Shvet-Dvip, Golok, Vaikunth, and Badrikãshram; and I see all 
of  these bhaktas as  being  extremely  luminous.    I  take  oath  on  this 
sabhã of sãdhus that there is not even the slightest lie in this matter.  
Why  do  I  have  to  take  oath  in  this  way?    Well,  it  is  because  not 
everyone understands such divinity, nor can they see it; that is why I 
have to take an oath. 
 
2.8 
“Therefore, even after attaining this satsang – which is  rare  for  even 
Brahmã – affection for objects other than Bhagvãn still remains.  This 
is  because  the  person  has  not  developed  as  firm  a  belief  for  the 
pratyaksha  svarup of Bhagvãn as  he  has  for  the  non-pratyaksha 
svarup of Bhagvãn.  That is why the Shrutis state, ‘If a person develops 
belief  in  his  guru – who  is  the  pratyaksha  svarup  of  Bhagvãn – in  the 
same  way  that  he  has  belief  in  the  non-pratyaksha  devs,  then  as  a 
result,  he  attains  all  the  purushãrths  (dharma,  arth,  kãm,  and  moksh) 
which  are  described as attainable’.    In  fact,  when  he  attains  the 
company  of  such  a sant,  he  has  attained  He  who  was  to  be  attained 
after  death,  while  still  alive;  he  has  attained  that  which  is  called 
moksh or kalyãn, while being alive. 
 
2.9 
“What I have just explained to  you  may  appear  to  be  simple,  but  in 
reality, it is extremely subtle.  A person who is currently behaving in 
this way will understand that this is extremely subtle; but others will 
not even be able to understand it.  That is how subtle it is.” 

GADHADÃ III 
- 684 - 
2.10 
After delivering this talk, Shreeji Mahãrãj bid “Jay Sachidãnand” to 
everyone and then returned to His residence.   
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III || 2 || 236 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 3 
Compassion And Love 
 
3.1 
In  the Samvat year  1883,  on Ashãdh vad 1  [20
th
 July  1826],  Swãmi 
Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was at His residence in Dãdã Khãchar’s 
darbãr in   Gadhadã.      On   that   day,   Harji  Thakkar   invited  Shreeji 
Mahãrãj to sanctify his house.  Shreeji Mahãrãj sat on a mattress with 
a  cylindrical  pillow  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside 
the east-facing rooms.  Harji Thakkar then performed pujã of Shreeji 
Mahãrãj  with  sandalwood  paste  mixed  with  saffron.    In  this  way, 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  sat  facing  east  and  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.    Garlands  of mogrã flowers  were  hanging  around  His  neck, 
gajarã of mogrã flowers  were  tied  around  both  arms,  and  tassels  of 
mogrã flowers  beautifully  decorated  His pãgh.    A sabhã of munis,  as 
well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
3.2 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  the  entire sãdhu-mandal, “Compassion 
and  love  reside  instinctively  in  the  heart  of  a bhakta of Bhagvãn.    Of 
the  two,  the  nature  of  love  is  like  honey;  it  sticks  everywhere.    The 
nature  of  compassion  is  that  a  person  feels  compassion  towards 
everything.  When Bharatji felt compassion for a deer, he had to take 
birth  from  the  womb  of  a  deer  in  his  next  life.    Moreover,  a  person 
who  is  compassionate  certainly  develops  love  towards  those  he  has 
compassion for. 
 
3.3 
“There are two methods for eradicating compassion and love:  ãtmã-
nishthã and vairãgya.  Of these, ãtmã-nishthã is such that nothing else 
can penetrate it.  The nature of vairãgya is that it shows all objects to 
be   perishable.      Therefore,   through ãtmã-nishthã and vairãgya, 

GADHADÃ III 
- 685 - 
compassion and  affection  are  destroyed.    In  addition,  the  influences 
of the sthul, sukshma, and kãran bodies are destroyed, and then only 
brahm-sattã remains.    But  then,  does a bhakta have  compassion and 
love  for Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas?    Or  does  he  not?    That  is  the 
question.” 
 
3.4 
Muktãnand    Swãmi,    Shuk    Muni,    Nityãnand    Swãmi,    and    other 
paramhans answered according to the extent of their understanding.  
However, none could give a satisfactory reply to Shreeji Mahãrãj’s 
question. 
 
3.5 
So, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Allow me to answer.  The answer is that by 
gnãn and vairãgya,  the chaitanya is  freed  from  the mãyik influences 
of  the  three  bodies,  the  three  mental  states,  and  the  three gun of 
Mãyã.    It  is  then  pure,  and  not  the  slightest  trace  of mãyik influence 
remains.  For example, consider the analogy of an oil lamp’s flame.  
Only when a wick-holder, some oil, and a wick unite can the flame of 
an  oil  lamp  be  seen  and  recognised.    But,  when  the  combination  of 
these three components is broken, the flame can no longer be seen by 
anyone,  nor  can  it  be  recognised  by  anyone.    Therefore,  only  when 
those components are combined is it seen and recognised.  Similarly, 
when  all  the mãyik influences  are  overcome  by gnãn and vairãgya, 
the jeevãtmã remains as pure brahm-sattã. 
 
3.6 
“Now, the jeevãtmã is  invisible  to  the  mind  and  speech,  and  it  is  not 
perceivable  by  any  of  the indriyas.    However,  with  time,  if  it  attains 
the knowledge of Bhagvãn by associating with a pure sampradãy, and 
it fully understands the greatness of Bhagvãn and His bhaktas, then it 
is freed from all mãyik influences.  Then, that jeevãtmã also becomes 
brahm-rup.    However,  compassion  and  love  for Bhagvãn and  His 
bhaktas still  remains  forever.    To  carry  the  analogy  of  the  oil  lamp 
further, when the combination of its components is broken, its flame 
remains  within  the  air,  where  it  cannot  be  perceived  by  any  of  the 
indriyas.  However, the fragrance or foul smell that had pervaded that 
flame  is  not  destroyed.    Even  though  the  air  is  more  superior  to  the 

GADHADÃ III 
- 686 - 
flame, it still becomes pervaded by fragrant or foul smells.  Likewise, 
by gnãn and vairãgya,  the jeevãtmã is  freed  from mãyik influences, 
but  the  impression  of satsang is  not  lost.    Even  though  it  becomes 
brahm-rup,  like Nãrad,  the Sanakãdik,  and  Shukji,  it  behaves  with 
intense  compassion  and  love  for Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas.    The 
following verses illustrate this: 
 
parinishthitopi nairgunya uttama-shloka-leelãya 
gruheeta-cheta rãjarshe akhyanam yad-adheetavan 
O King (Parikshit)!  Despite being perfectly poised in the nirgun state, having 
been attracted by the leelãs of Bhagvãn, I (Shukdevji) studied the Shreemad 
Bhãgvat. 
 
harer-gunãkshipta-matir-bhagavãn bãdarãyanihi 
adhyagãn-mahad-ãkhyãnam nityam vishnu vishnu-jana-priyaha 
Honourable (Shukdevji) – son of Vyãs, to whom bhaktas of Vishnu are very 
dear – was attracted by the gun of Bhagvãn, and therefore constantly studied 
the great Shreemad Bhãgvat. 
 
ãtmãrãmãsh-cha-munayo... 
Despite being engaged in the ãtmã and having overcome all improper natures, 
the munis still offer selfless bhakti to Bhagvãn because He possesses such divya 
qualities. 
 
prãyena Munayo rãjan... 
O King [Parikshit]!  Although the munis had no need for the rules of moral 
conduct and had attained the nirgun state, they still engaged themselves in 
praising the glory of Bhagvãn. 
 
 “The Geetã also states: 
 
brahma-bhootaha prasannãtmã na shochati na kãnkshati 
samaha sarveshu bhooteshu mad-bhaktim labhate parãm 
A person, who has become brahm-rup remains joyful, grieves nothing, desires 
nothing, behaves equally with all beings and attains my supreme bhakti. 
 
3.7 
“In this way, many verses promote the view that bhaktas of Bhagvãn 
who  have  shed mãyik influences  and  have  become brahm-rup by 

GADHADÃ III 
- 687 - 
gnãn and vairãgya,  still  have  compassion  and  love  for Bhagvãn and 
His bhaktas.    On  the  other  hand,  a  person  who  is  not  a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn,  but  has  overcome mãyik influences  by ãtmã-nishthã and 
vairãgya alone  and  behaves  as  the ãtmã,  has  been  influenced  by 
kusang during  the  process  of  realising Bhagvãn,  who  has only ãtmã-
nishthã and do not have upãsanã of Bhagvãn.  As a result, he does not 
develop  compassion  and  love  for bhaktas of Bhagvãn.    Just  as  a  foul 
smell  lingers  in  the  air  and  in  fire,  similarly,  the  impressions  of 
kusang, which cannot be overcome by any means, lingers within him. 
 
3.8 
“For example, Ashvatthãmã was brahm-rup, but he was influenced by 
kusang.    Therefore,  he  did  not  develop  compassion  or  love  for Shree 
Krishna   Bhagvãn or   His bhaktas,   the   Pãndavs.      Similarly,   the 
impressions  of kusang do  not  disappear  in  a  person  who  has  only 
knowledge  of  the ãtmã,  even  though  he  becomes brahm-rup;  nor 
does  he  develop  compassion  and  love  for Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas.  
However, for a bhakta of Bhagvãn, even though mãyik influences are 
overcome, intense compassion and love for Bhagvãn and His bhaktas 
increase.    But,  in  no  way  are  compassion  and  love  ever  lost;  they 
always remain.” 
 
3.9 
After delivering this talk, Shreeji Mahãrãj bid “Jay Sachidãnand” to 
everyone and then returned to His residence. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III || 3 || 237 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 4 
Bãdhitãnu Vrutti 
 
4.1 
In the Samvat year 1883, on Shrãvan sud 3 [6
th
 August 1826], Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  facing  north  on  a  mattress 
with a cylindrical pillow that had been placed on the veranda outside 
the medi of His residence in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He 
was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 

GADHADÃ III 
- 688 - 
4.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Even though a bhakta of Bhagvãn may 
possess gnãn and vairãgya,  and  even  if  by  the  force  of  a  thought 
process  the bhakta has  overcome  affection  for mãyik objects  that 
cause  him  bondage,  until  he  attains nirvikalp samãdhi, bãdhitãnu 
vrutti still remains within. 
 
4.3 
“Until a bhakta of Bhagvãn attains nirvikalp samãdhi – even  though 
he  may  possess gnãn and vairãgya,  and  by  the  force  of  a  thought 
process  has  overcome  affection  for mãyik objects  that  cause  him 
bondage – bãdhitãnu  vrutti remains  within  him.    Due  to  this,  he 
doubts, ‘Maybe  attachment  for  my  mother,  father,  wife,  children, 
wealth,  relatives,  body,  or  property  still remains!’  He  remains  fearful 
in this way.  For example, a brave warrior, even though he has killed 
all of his enemies, still occasionally becomes frightened by even those 
dead  enemies;  even  if  he  sees  them  in  his  dreams,  he  becomes 
frightened.      Similarly,   due   to bãdhitãnu   vrutti,   even   a bhakta 
possessing gnãn is  afraid  of  the  bondage  of  worldly  objects  that  he 
has  proved  false  from  within  and  from  which  he  has  severed  all 
affection.  At some time, if he remembers the money he possessed, or 
his  wife  or  other  objects,  he  becomes  fearful  in  his  mind  and  thinks, 
‘What if they cause bondage?’  In this way, the recalling of objects that 
have been falsified from within is called bãdhitãnu vrutti. 
 
4.4 
“Bãdhitãnu  vrutti is  overcome  when nirvikalp samãdhi is  attained.  
Then, that person becomes oblivious of eating and drinking, day and 
night,  pain  and  pleasure.    But,  when  he  withdraws  from nirvikalp 
samãdhi and  enters savikalp samãdhi, bãdhitãnu  vrutti still  remains.  
As a result of the influence of that bãdhitãnu vrutti, when that bhakta 
contracts  a  fever  or  is  at  the  moment  of  death,  he sometimes  recalls 
other   objects   besides Bhagvãn.      At   that   time,   he   may   babble 
meaninglessly;   he   may   even   say   words   like, ‘Mother!    Father!’  
Hearing   this,   a   person   who   does   not   understand   the   nature   of 
bãdhitãnu vrutti,  will  perceive  faults  in  that bhakta by  thinking, ‘He 
was called a bhakta of Bhagvãn; so, why does he speak like this at the 

GADHADÃ III 
- 689 - 
time of death?’  Such faults are perceived without knowing the nature 
of bãdhitãnu vrutti. 
 
4.5 
“In the world many sinful people die with full consciousness.  Also, a 
soldier  or  a  Rãjput  who  has  injured  his  body  may  die  while  being 
fully  conscious.    That  being  so,  will  a vimukh who  dies  with  full 
consciousness  still  attain kalyãn,  despite  being  a vimukh?    Of  course 
not;  he  will  certainly  be  sent  to Narak.    Conversely,  regardless  of 
whether  a bhakta of Bhagvãn dies  while  engaged  in  the  chanting  of 
Bhagvãn’s name,  or  in  a  disturbed  state  due  to  the  influence  of 
bãdhitãnu vrutti, bhakta still reaches the holy feet of Bhagvãn.” 
 
4.6 
On  the  evening  of  that  same  day,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  the 
veranda  outside  the medi of  His  residence.    He  was  dressed  entirely 
in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of sãdhus,  as  well  as haribhaktas from 
various places had gathered before Him. 
 
4.7 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  asked  the  senior paramhans, “Please describe 
how  the jeev,  which  resides  within  the  body,  is  present  in  one 
location, and how it pervades the entire body.” 
 
4.8 
The paramhans answered according to their understanding, but none 
were able to satisfactorily answer Shreeji Mahãrãj’s question. 
 
4.9 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “In the body, just as food is transformed 
into semen, similarly, in the heart, the five bhuts are transformed into 
a  disc  of  flesh,  within  which the jeev resides.    The jeev clings  to  this 
disc  of  flesh  like  a  torch  made  of  rags  that  is  set  alight  after  being 
immersed in oil.  Also, just as fire pervades an iron nail, similarly, the 
jeev actually   resides   in   the   disc   of   flesh,   and   by   consciousness 
pervades the entire body.  Therefore, regardless of where pain is felt 
in the body, it is the jeev itself that feels the pain; so, the jeev cannot 
be said to be separate from the pleasures and pains of the body. 
 
4.10 
“However, some may argue, ‘The jeev is luminous, whereas the disc of 
flesh  and  the  body  have  no  light.    So,  how  can  they  be  said  to  have 

GADHADÃ III 
- 690 - 
combined?’  The answer to this is that just as without the combination 
of oil, a wick-holder and a wick, a flame cannot hover in space on its 
own,  similarly,  without  associating  with  the  disc  of  flesh  the jeev 
cannot   remain  alone.      Just  as   fire – which  is  distinct   from   the 
container, the oil and the wick – cannot be destroyed by breaking just 
the container, in the same way, the jeev does not die with the death of 
the  body  even  though  it  pervades  the  disc  of  flesh  and  the  body.  
Although  the jeev does  experience  pleasure  and  pain  along  with  the 
body,  it is  not  perishable like  the  body.   So,  the jeev is indestructible 
and luminous, and it also pervades the body. 
 
4.11 
“Furthermore, if an oil lamp is placed at one location in a mandir, its 
flame  predominantly  pervades  the  wick;  and  secondarily,  it  also 
pervades   the   entire   building.      In   the   same   way,   the jeev also 
predominantly  resides  in  and  pervades  the  disc  of  flesh  that  is  a 
product of the five bhuts; and secondarily, it resides in and pervades 
the  entire  body.    Moreover, Bhagvãn resides  within  the jeev as  a 
witness.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III || 4 || 238 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 5 
Bhakti Coupled With The Knowledge Of Bhagvãn’s Greatness 
 
5.1 
In the Samvat year 1883, on Bhãdarvã sud 11 [12
th
 September 1826], 
Shreeji Mahãrãj was sitting on a mattress with a cylindrical pillow on 
the veranda outside the west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr 
in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    He  was  also 
wearing  a  garland  of mogrã flowers  around  His  neck.    Tassels  of 
mogrã flowers decorated His pãgh, and gajarã of mogrã flowers were 
tied  around  His  arms.    A sabhã of  the munis,  as  well as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 

GADHADÃ III 
- 691 - 
5.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Someone please ask a question.” 
 
5.3 
So, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, of the various types of bhakti 
offered  to Bhagvãn,  which  type  of bhakti does  not  encounter  any 
obstacles, and which type does encounter obstacles?” 
  
5.4 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “In  the  third skandh of   the   Shreemad 
Bhãgvat, within the Kapil Geetã, Devhuti says to Kapilji,  
 
yan-nãmadheya-shravanãnu-keertanãd-yat-prahvanãd-yat-smaranã-dapi kvachit 
shvãdopi sadyaha savanãya kalpate katham punas-te bhagavan-nu darshanãt 
If even a ‘shvapach’ (a vile person who eats dog-meat) becomes immediately 
suitable for performing yagnas (perfectly purified) by merely hearing and 
repeating the name of Bhagvãn, by bowing to Bhagvãn, and by remembering 
Bhagvãn, then what can be said of your darshan? 
 
aho bata shavpachoto gareeyãn yaj-jiha-vãgre vartate nãma tubhyam 
tepus-tapas-te juhuvuhu sasnur-ãryã bhramã-nuchur-nãma grunanti ye te 
How amazing!  Even a ‘shvapach’ (a vile person who eats dog-meat) becomes 
great if your name is on the tip of his tongue (he chants Bhagvãn’s name).  
Those who chant your name are the ones who have performed all tap, 
performed all yagnas, bathed in the sacred waters of all the places of 
pilgrimage, and studied all the Veds; they indeed are the ãryãs (the noble 
ones). 
 
“The greatness of Bhagvãn is  described  in  these  two  verses.    Also, 
Kapilji describes his own greatness to Devhuti: 
 
mad-bhayãd-vãti vãto-yam suryas-tapati mad-bhagyãt 
varshateendro dahatyagnir-mrutyush-charati mad-bhayãt 
It is by fear of me that the Vãyu (wind) blows, Surya (sun) shines, Indra 
(clouds) rains, Agni (fire) burns, and Yam (death) devours the living. 
 
5.5
 “A person who has bhakti for Bhagvãn coupled with such knowledge 
of  His  greatness  encounters  no  obstacles  in  any  form.    On  the  other 
hand,  a  person  who  offers bhakti without  realising  the  greatness  of 

GADHADÃ III 
- 692 - 
Bhagvãn and  who  perceives  worldly  characteristics  in  Him,  does 
encounter obstacles.” 
 
5.6 
Muktãnand Swãmi  then  asked, “By  what means can such bhakti 
coupled with the knowledge of Bhagvãn’s greatness be developed?” 
 
5.7 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “Bhakti coupled   with   the   knowledge   of 
Bhagvãn’s greatness  arises  in  a  person’s  heart  by  serving  and 
associating with renowned sãdhus like Shukji and the Sanakãdik.” 
 
5.8 
Then, Shuk Muni asked, “One bhakta has perfect nishchay in Bhagvãn, 
and  disturbances  such  as kãm, krodh, lobh,  and moh do  not  arise  in 
his  heart.    A  second bhakta has  perfect nishchay in Bhagvãn,  but 
disturbances such as kãm, krodh, lobh, and moh do arise in his heart.  
When  these  two  types  of bhaktas leave  their  bodies,  do  they  attain 
the  same  level  of  bliss  in  the dhãm of Bhagvãn,  or  do  they  attain 
different levels of bliss?” 
 
5.9 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If a bhakta of Bhagvãn whose nishchay is 
perfect  and  who  is  not  disturbed  by  inner  enemies,  but  desires 
anything other than the pratyaksha svarup of Shree Krishna Bhagvãn, 
then  even  if  he  is  a  great tyãgi, and  has  firm vairãgya and  intense 
ãtmã-nishthã,  he  will  attain  a  lower  level  of  bliss.    As  for  the  other 
bhakta,  even  though  he  also  has  perfect nishchay in Bhagvãn,  when 
inner  enemies  cause  disturbances  within,  he  feels  guilt  within  his 
heart.      But,   except   for   the pratyaksha svarup of Shree Krishna 
Bhagvãn,  he  wishes  for  no  other  object.    Then,  even  if  he  has  only  a 
slight  amount   of ãtmã-nishthã and vairãgya,   such  a bhakta still 
attains profound bliss in the dhãm of Bhagvãn after leaving his body. 
 
5.10 
“This is because the first bhakta superficially  appears  to  be  a tyãgi 
and nishkãm.    However,  he  does  not  have  wish  for  the murti of 
Bhagvãn, but instead has desires for the darshan of the ãtmã and the 
four  types  of mukti.    Therefore,  he  is  called  a sakãm bhakta.    In  the 
higher loks, he will certainly attain less bliss.  Conversely, the second 

GADHADÃ III 
- 693 - 
bhakta superficially appears to be a sakãm bhakta, but inwardly, that 
bhakta wishes for nothing except the murti of Bhagvãn.  If a desire for 
pleasures  other  than  the murti of Bhagvãn arises,  he  feels  intense 
guilt  in  his  mind.    Therefore,  he  is  called  a nishkãm bhakta.    When 
such  a bhakta leaves  his  body,  he  attains  profound  bliss,  becomes  a 
pãrshad of Bhagvãn and develops intense  love  for the murti of Shree 
Krishna Bhagvãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III || 5 || 239 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 6 
The Friendship Between The Mind And The Jeev 
 
6.1 
In  the Samvat year  1883,  on Bhãdarvã vad 5  [21
st
 September  1826], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  in  His  residence  in 
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was dressed entirely in white 
clothes.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from various places, 
had gathered before Him. 
 
6.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj looked compassionately at all the bhaktas and 
said, “If a bhakta of Bhagvãn engages  in  delivering kathãs,  singing 
kirtans, listening to talks of Bhagvãn, and the rest of the nine types of 
bhakti with jealousy towards other bhaktas, then Bhagvãn is not very 
pleased by that bhakti.  But, if a person discards his jealousy and then 
offers bhakti only  for  his  own kalyãn,  and  not  to  display  to  other 
people,  then Bhagvãn is  pleased  by  that bhakti.    Therefore,  a  person 
who wants to please Bhagvãn should not offer bhakti to please other 
people  or  out  of  jealousy  for  someone,  but  should  do  so  only  for his 
own kalyãn. 
 
6.3 
“While offering bhakti to Bhagvãn, if a person commits a mistake, he 
should not blame someone else for that fault.  It is the very nature of 
all  people  that  when  they  are  at  fault,  they  claim, ‘I made a mistake 
because someone else misled me; but I am not really at fault’.  A person 

GADHADÃ III 
- 694 - 
who says this is a fool.  After all, others may say, ‘Go and jump into a 
well?’  Then, by such words, should a person really jump into a well?  
Of course not.  Therefore, the fault lies only in the person who makes 
the mistake, but he blames others. 
 
6.4 
“Similarly, to blame the indriyas and antah-karans is  the  foolishness 
of the jeev.  In reality, the jeev and the mind are close mutual friends.  
Their friendship is like the friendship between milk and water.  When 
milk  and  water  are  mixed  and  heated  on  a  fire,  water  settles  below 
the milk and it burns, but it does not allow the milk to burn.  To save 
the water, the milk overflows and extinguishes the fire.  Such is their 
friendship.    The jeev and  the  mind  have  a  similarly  close  friendship.  
So, the mind never has thoughts of things that the jeev does not like.  
Only   when   the jeev likes   something   does   the   mind   attempt   to 
persuade  the jeev.    How  does  it  attempt  to  persuade  it?    Well,  when 
the jeev is  performing dhyãn upon Bhagvãn,  the  mind  suggests, ‘You 
should also perform dhyãn on some female bhakta Bhagvãn’.    The 
mind  then makes  the jeev think of all  of her  features.   Then,  it forms 
indecent thoughts about her just as it forms indecent thoughts about 
other women. 
 
6.5 
“But, if the bhakta’s jeev is  extremely  pure,  he  will  not  accept  the 
arguments  of  the  mind,  and  instead,  he  will  feel  intense  sorrow.  
Therefore,   the   mind   will   never   entertain   such   thoughts   again.  
Conversely,   if   his jeev is   polluted   and   sinful,   it   will   accept   the 
arguments of the mind.  Then, by making the bhakta repeatedly think 
of  indecent  thoughts,  the  mind  will  make  him  fall  from  the  path  of 
kalyãn.  For this reason, a true mumukshu develops intense hatred for 
the talks of adharma, which are against the path of kalyãn, regardless 
of  whether  they  are  suggested  by  his  own  mind  or  by  some  other 
person.  Then, his own mind or the other person will not reappear in 
an attempt to persuade him. 
 
6.6 
“Furthermore, because the mind is a friend of the jeev,  it  will  never 
entertain  thoughts  which  the jeev does  not  like.    So,  when  indecent 

GADHADÃ III 
- 695 - 
thoughts  are  formed  in  the  mind,  if  the jeev becomes  extremely 
furious  with  it,  such  thoughts  will  never  arise  in  the  mind  again.  
Therefore, when indecent thoughts repeatedly arise in the mind, the 
bhakta should  understand  it  to  be  the  fault  of  his  own jeev,  not  the 
fault of his mind alone. 
 
6.7 
“If a person offers bhakti to Bhagvãn with this understanding, the evil 
influence  of  some vimukh or  his  own  mind  will  not  be  able  to  affect 
him even slightly.  Then, he will be able to worship Bhagvãn without 
any obstacles.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III || 6 || 240 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 7 
Bhagvãn Is Sãkãr 
 
7.1 
In the Samvat year 1883, on Bhãdarvã vad 6 [22
nd
 September 1826], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress  with  a 
cylindrical  pillow  at  His  residence  in  Dãdã  Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Gadhadã.  He was dressed entirely in white clothes.  He was wearing 
garlands  of mogrã flowers  around  His  neck,  and  tassels  of mogrã 
flowers  also  decorated  His pãgh.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
7.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said to all the bhaktas, “I shall now tell you my 
deepest principle.  For a person who desires his own kalyãn, nothing 
in  this  world is more  blissful  than Bhagvãn and  His sant.   Therefore, 
just  as  a  person  is  deeply  attached  to  his  own  body,  he  should  be 
similarly  attached  to Bhagvãn and  His sant.    A  person  should  also 
remain  absolutely  loyal  to  the bhaktas of Bhagvãn.    Even  if  while 
keeping  that  loyalty  his  reputation  increases  or  decreases,  or  he  is 
honoured  or  insulted,  or  he  lives  or  dies,  in  no  way  should  he 
abandon  his  loyalty  to Bhagvãn and His bhaktas.    In  addition,  he 
should  not  allow  hatred  to  develop  towards  them.    Furthermore,  he 

GADHADÃ III 
- 696 - 
should not have as much love towards his body or bodily relations as 
he has towards the bhaktas of Bhagvãn.  For a bhakta who behaves in 
this  way,  even  extremely  powerful  enemies,  such  as kãm and krodh, 
are unable to defeat him.” 
 
7.3 
Continuing, Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Bhagvãn,  who  possesses  a 
definite murti,  is  always  present  in  His dhãm, Akshardhãm.   Bhaktas 
of Bhagvãn,  who  also  possess  a svarup,  remain  in  His  service  in  that 
dhãm.      Therefore,   a   person   who   has   taken   firm   refuge   in   the 
pratyaksha  svarup of Bhagvãn should  not  have  the  following  fear  in 
his mind:  ‘What if I become a ghost or an evil spirit, or attain the lok of 
Indra  or  the  lok  of  Brahmã  after I die?’  He  should  not  have  such 
doubts in his mind.  After all, a bhakta of Bhagvãn who possesses the 
understanding   mentioned   earlier   definitely   attains   the dhãm of 
Bhagvãn; Bhagvãn does not leave him astray anywhere in between.   
 
7.4 
“Moreover, the bhakta should firmly keep his mind at the holy feet of 
Bhagvãn.  Just as an iron nail that is firmly affixed to an iron surface 
can never be separated, similarly, a person’s mind should be fixed 
firmly  at  the  holy  feet  of Bhagvãn.    When  the bhakta has  kept his 
mind at the holy feet of Bhagvãn in this way, he does not have to die 
to attain the dhãm of Bhagvãn – he attains it while still alive.” 
 
7.5 
Having delivered this talk, Shreeji Mahãrãj bid “Jay Sachidãnand” to 
everyone and then instructed the sabhã to disperse. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III || 7 || 241 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 8 
Do Not Keep The Company Of A Vimukh 
 
8.1 
In  the Samvat year  1883,  on Bhãdarvã vad 9  [25
th
 September  1826], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress  with  a 
cylindrical  pillow  that  had  been  placed  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on 

GADHADÃ III 
- 697 - 
the veranda outside the west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr 
in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    Garlands  of 
mogrã flowers  were  hanging  around  His  neck,  and  tassels  of mogrã 
flowers decorated His pãgh.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
8.2 
Then,   Shreeji   Mahãrãj   asked   the munis,  “How   can   a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn remain  eternally  happy?”    The  senior sãdhus replied 
according  to  their  understanding,  but  then  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  Himself 
said, “The answer is that a bhakta of Bhagvãn who has firm vairãgya 
and  has  extremely  firm svadharma;  who  has gained  control  over  all 
of  his indriyas by  these  two  means;  who  has  intense  love  for  the 
Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas;  who  has  a  close  friendship  with Bhagvãn 
and  His bhaktas;  who  never  becomes  indifferent  towards Bhagvãn 
and His bhaktas; and who is pleased only by the company of Bhagvãn 
and His bhaktas, but does not like the company of a vimukh – remains 
eternally happy in this lok and beyond. 
 
8.3 
“A  person,  who  has  not  controlled  his indriyas by vairãgya and 
svadharma remains  miserable,  despite  staying  in  the  company  of 
Bhagvãn and  His bhakta.    This  is  because  a  person  who  has  not 
gained   control   over   his indriyas does   not   experience   happiness 
anywhere.  Even while engaged in bhakti towards Bhagvãn, when the 
indriyas are  drawn  towards  the vishays,  that bhakta experiences 
extreme  misery  in  his  heart.    Therefore,  only  a  person  who  gains 
control over his indriyas remains eternally happy.  Furthermore, only 
a  person  who  has  gained  control  over  his indriyas should  be  known 
to have vairãgya and dharma.    A  person  who  has  not  controlled  his 
indriyas should   not   be  known   to   possess vairãgya and dharma.  
Therefore, since a person who has vairãgya and dharma has restraint 
over all of his indriyas, he is eternally happy.” 
 
8.4 
Then,  Muktãnand Swãmi said, “Mahãrãj, for a bhakta of Bhagvãn, 
what is the one greatest obstacle in his bhakti towards Bhagvãn?” 

GADHADÃ III 
- 698 - 
8.5 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “For  a bhakta of Bhagvãn,   the   greatest 
obstacles  are  that  he  does  not  realise  his  own  faults,  his  mind 
becomes  distant  from Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas,  and  he  develops  a 
lack  of  concern  towards  the bhakta of Bhagvãn.    These  are  the 
greatest obstacles for a bhakta.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III || 8 || 242 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 9 
Awareness 
 
9.1 
In  the Samvat year  1883,  on Ãso sud 11  [11
th
 October  1826],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  the  veranda  outside  the 
west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was 
dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes,  and  was  wearing  garlands  around 
His  neck,  and gajarã of  flowers  were  tied  around  His  arms.    Also, 
tassels  of  flowers  were hanging  from  His pãgh.    A sabhã of munis,  as 
well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
9.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said to all the bhaktas, “I shall now describe to 
all of you male and female bhaktas the sthiti and understanding of my 
senior paramhans as  it  truly  is.    After  listening  to  this  talk,  I  request 
all of you to narrate how you behave and to reveal your sthiti.” 
 
9.3 
Saying  this,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj began, “The senior sãdhus in  my muni-
mandal behave in such a way that the awareness within their hearts 
is the gateway to the dhãm of Bhagvãn.  It is at this gateway where all 
the sãdhus remain standing.  Consider the following analogy:  A king’s 
guards, while standing at the entrance of the king’s palace, do not 
allow   any   thieves   or   robbers   to   come   near   the   king.      They 
courageously   believe, ‘If  anyone  comes  near  the  king  to  cause 
problems,  we  will  cut  them  to  pieces,  but  in  no  way  will  we  let  them 
reach the king’.  With such courage, they wait, armed with shields and 
swords.  Similarly, all these sãdhus are standing at the gateway of the 
dhãm of Bhagvãn in the form of awareness. 

GADHADÃ III 
- 699 - 
9.4
 “Inside that gateway of awareness (Akshardhãm)  dwells Bhagvãn,  of 
whom  they  do darshan.    They  do  not  allow  wealth,  women,  or  any 
other worldly objects to enter that murti of Bhagvãn in their heart.  If 
any  worldly  object  does  forcefully  attempt  to  enter  the  heart,  they 
destroy  that  object,  but  in  no  way  do  they  allow  it  to  enter  the 
location in their heart where they have secured Bhagvãn.  In this way, 
they constantly remain alert like a brave warrior.  However, they do 
not  move  from  their  position,  regardless  of  whether  they  encounter 
progress   or   regress,   happiness   or   misery,   praises   or   insults,   or 
countless other types of difficulties. 
 
9.5 
“However,  someone  may  doubt, ‘If  they  do  not  move  from  their 
position,  then  how  do  they  perform  their  bodily  activities,  such  as 
eating and drinking?’  I shall explain this using the following example:  
Consider a woman who goes to a well to draw water.  She places her 
feet on the edge of the well.  On the one hand, she remains cautious of 
this, for fear that she will fall into the well.  However, her vrutti is also 
fixed upon drawing water from the well.  In another example, a man 
who has mounted a horse is aware of his feet in the horse’s stirrups 
and  is  also  aware  of  the  reins  in  his  hands.    While  riding,  he  is  also 
aware  of  the  trees,  ditches,  and  stones  that  come  along  the  path.    In 
the  same  way,  all  these sãdhus,  while  keeping antar-drashti,  remain 
in  the sevã of Bhagvãn and  also  perform  their bodily  activities;  but 
they are not deflected from their sthiti.” 
 
9.6 
Shreeji Mahãrãj therefore revealed the sthiti of the senior sãdhus and 
then  said,  “All  of  you  should  keep antar-drashti and   constantly 
remain  in  the sevã of Bhagvãn.    Moreover,  you  should  not  allow 
objects  other  than Bhagvãn to  become  dearer  to  you  than  Him.    All 
should be extremely cautious of this. 
 
9.7 
“After all, if a king’s guard is careless while guarding the king, thieves 
and  robbers  would  reach  the  king,  and the guard’s service would be 
rendered  meaningless.    Similarly,  if  a bhakta develops  love  for  the 
objects  other  than Bhagvãn,  then  money,  women,  and  other  objects 

GADHADÃ III 
- 700 - 
also enter his heart, in which lies the awareness of Bhagvãn.  Due to 
this, his bhakti is rendered meaningless. 
 
9.8 
“Therefore,  a  person  who  wishes  to  keep  his bhakti free   from 
obstacles  and  to  attain  the  holy  feet  of Bhagvãn,  should  remain 
constantly vigilant at the gateway of the dhãm of Bhagvãn in the form 
of  awareness,  and  should  not  allow  any objects  except Bhagvãn to 
enter his heart.” 
 
9.9 
In  this  way,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  spoke  words  of  wisdom  for  all  of  His 
bhaktas. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III || 9 || 243 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 10 
Vrundãvan And Kãshi 
 
10.1 
In  the Samvat year  1883,  on Ãso vad 12  [28
th
 October  1826],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  the  veranda  outside  the 
east-facing  rooms  of  Dãdã  Khãchar's darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was 
dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of sãdhus,  as  well  as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
10.2 
In the sabhã, an educated brãhman of the Mãdhvi Sampradãy came to 
Shreeji Mahãrãj.  Shreeji Mahãrãj asked him, “In the shãstras of your 
sampradãy, Vrundãvan is called the dhãm of Bhagvãn.  It is also said, 
‘Even at the time of final destruction, Vrundãvan is not destroyed’.  The 
followers  of Shiv also  claim, ‘At the time of final destruction, Kãshi is 
not destroyed’.    But,  I  do  not  understand  these  statements.    This  is 
because during final destruction, pruthvi, jal, tej, vãyu, and ãkãsh are 
completely  destroyed,  so  how  can  Vrundãvan  and  Kãshi  possibly 
remain?    If  they  do  remain,  how  are  they  supported?    Such  serious 
doubts arise.” 
10.3 
Having  said  this,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  for  the  Shreemad  Bhãgvat 
shãstras to   be   brought,   and   the   narration   of   the   four   types   of 

GADHADÃ III 
- 701 - 
destruction  (nitya-pralay, nimit-pralay, prãkrut-pralay,  and ãtyantik-
pralay) from the eleventh and twelfth skandhs. 
 
10.4 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “Looking  from  the  viewpoint  of  the 
Shreemad  Bhãgvat  and  the  Geetã,  during  final  destruction,  nothing 
remains of anything that has evolved from Prakruti and Purush.  So, if 
in final destruction Vrundãvan does remain intact, then please quote 
a verse from the shãstras of Vyãsji or a verse from the Veds to prove 
it.  There is no greater ãchãrya than Vyãsji.  Others, who have become 
ãchãryas and  have  established  their sampradãys,  have  accepted  the 
shãstras of Vyãsji as  respected.    Therefore,  the  words  of Vyãsji,  the 
greatest ãchãrya, are more respected than the words of all the other 
ãchãryas.    So,  using  the  words  of Vyãsji and  the  verse  of  the  Veds, 
verify   the   statement, ‘Vrundãvan  is  not  destroyed  in  the  final 
destruction’.  Only then will my doubt be cleared. 
 
10.5 
“Moreover,  whoever has  become  an ãchãrya has  established  his 
beliefs  based  on  reference  from  the  words  of  the  Pãdma  Purãn.  
Mostly,  they  have  established  these  beliefs  by  inserting  fictional 
verses  into  the  Pãdma  Purãn.   As  a  result,  no  one  besides  their  own 
followers  believes  them.    Therefore,  I  will  be  convinced  if  you  quote 
the  words  of  the  popular  Shreemad  Bhãgvat  Purãn.    This  is  because 
Vyãsji had composed  the Shreemad  Bhãgvat  after  taking  the  essence 
of all the Veds, Purãns, and the historical shãstras.  Therefore, there is 
no  Purãn  as  perfectly  respected  as  the  Shreemad  Bhãgvat.    Also,  the 
whole  of  the  Mahãbhãrat  is  not  as  respected  as  the  Bhagvad  Geetã.  
Therefore,  quote  the  words  of  such  powerful shãstras to  convince 
me.” 
 
10.6 
After  hearing  these  words  of  Shreeji  Mahãrãj,  the brãhman said, 
“Mahãrãj, the question you have raised is logical.  There is no one on 
this  earth  capable  of  answering  your  question.    In  my  mind,  I  have 
formed  a  firm  belief, ‘You are the ãchãrya  of  all  ãchãryas,  and  the 
ishvar of all ishvars’.    Therefore,  please  have  compassion  on  me  and 
explain to me your principle.” 

GADHADÃ III 
- 702 - 
10.7 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “From the Veds, the Purãns, the historical 
shãstras,  and  the  Smrutis,  I  have  formed  the  belief  that jeev, mãyã, 
ishvar, Brahm,  and Parbrahm are  all  eternal.    Consider  it  as  follows:  
Mãyã represents the soil, the jeevs represent the seeds in the soil, and 
ishvar, represents the rain.  By the will of Bhagvãn, an ishvar – in the 
form  of Purush – unites  with Mãyã.    As  a  result,  just  as  the  seeds  in 
the  soil  sprout  by  the  association  of  rainwater,  similarly,  the jeevs, 
which  are  eternal,  arise  from  within Mãyã;  but  new jeevs are  not 
created.    Therefore,  just  as ishvar is  eternal, Mãyã is  eternal.    The 
jeevs residing   within Mãyã are   also   eternal,   and   they   are   not 
components of Bhagvãn; they are always jeevs. 
 
10.8 
“When a jeev seeks  the  refuge  of Bhagvãn,  it  overcomes Bhagvãn’s 
Mãyã,  becomes brahm-rup like Nãrad and  the Sanakãdik,  attains  the 
dhãm of Bhagvãn, and becomes His pãrshad.  This is my principle.” 
 
10.9 
Hearing these words of Shreeji Mahãrãj, the brãhman abandoned his 
Vaishnav beliefs, accepted Shreeji Mahãrãj’s refuge, and was initiated 
into the Uddhav Sampradãy.    
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III || 10 || 244 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 11 
Understanding Like That Of Sitãji 
 
11.1 
In  the Samvat year  1883,  on Ashãdh sud 3  [27
th
 June  1827],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on 
the  veranda  outside  the  east-facing  rooms of  Dãdã  Khãchar's darbãr 
in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of 
munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before Him. 
 
11.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “I wish to ask the following question:  Is 
there one method to overcome both the indriyas and the mind?  Or is 

GADHADÃ III 
- 703 - 
the  method  to  overcome  the indriyas different  from  the  means  to 
overcome the mind?  That is the question.” 
 
11.3 
The senior paramhans replied  according  to  their  understanding,  but 
they were unable to give a precise answer. 
 
11.4 
So, Shreeji Mahãrãj said Himself, “The answer is that the indriyas are 
overcome  by vairãgya, svadharma, tap,  and niyams;  and  the  mind  is 
overcome by the nine types of bhakti coupled with the knowledge of 
Bhagvãn’s greatness.” 
 
11.5 
Muktãnand Swãmi then asked, “How can the type of bliss that a 
bhakta of Bhagvãn enjoys  in nirvikalp samãdhi be  enjoyed  even 
without samãdhi?” 
 
11.6 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied, “If the bhakta has  profound  attachment  and 
deep  love  for Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas,  just  like  the  attachment  and 
love that he has for his own body, then the type of bliss that prevails 
in nirvikalp samãdhi will  continue  to  remain  forever,  even  without 
that samãdhi.  That is the only answer.” 
 
11.7 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked paramhans,  “What  type  of 
understanding  must  a bhakta have,  where  he  will  in  no  way  recede 
from  the  path  of kalyãn regardless  of  the  unpleasant  circumstances 
he may encounter, and where he develops such firmness that he will 
not be affected by any obstacles whatsoever?” 
 
11.8 
The senior sãdhus attempted to answer according to their 
understanding, but Shreeji Mahãrãj’s question was not completely 
answered. 
 
11.9 
So, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “The answer to this is as follows:  If a person 
is  profoundly  attached  to Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas,  just  as  he  is 
attached to his body, then he will not be affected by any obstacles.  In 

GADHADÃ III 
- 704 - 
fact,  regardless  of  the  extent  of  unpleasant  circumstances  he  may 
encounter, he will not turn away from Bhagvãn and His bhaktas.” 
 
11.10 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  addressed  the paramhans again.    He  said, 
“When Sitãji was  exiled  to  the  forest  by Rãmchandraji,  she  felt  great 
sorrow.      Lakshmanji   was   also   very   unhappy.      But   then Sitãji 
explained  to  Lakshmanji, ‘I am not crying because of my own grief; I 
am    crying    for    the    grief    of    Rãmchandraji.        He    is    extremely 
compassionate,  and  since  he  has  exiled  me  to  the  forest  out  of  fear  of 
public accusation, he must be thinking, “I have sent  Sitã  to  the  forest 
without any fault of her own.”  Knowing this and being compassionate, 
he  must  be  experiencing  severe  grief  in  his  mind.    So,  please  tell 
Rãmchandraji, “Sitã is not distressed; she will go to Vãlmiki Rushi’s 
ãshram and happily engage in your worship there.  So, do not feel any 
sorrow on account of Sitã’s distress.”  Please pass this message to 
Rãmchandraji.  Sitãji sent  this  message  with  Lakshmanji,  but  in  no 
way did she perceive faults in Rãmchandraji. 
 
11.11 
“Now, one bhakta is such that he does not perceive faults in Bhagvãn 
and  His bhaktas,  but his vairãgya and dharma are moderate.    On  the 
other  hand,  another bhakta has  intense vairãgya and dharma,  but 
does not have an understanding like that of Sitã.  Of these two types 
of bhaktas,  which  type  should  a  person  lovingly  keep  the  company 
of?” 
 
11.12 
Chaitanyãnand  Swãmi  replied,  “A  person  should  only  keep  the 
company – with intense love – of someone who has an understanding 
like Sitãji, even though that person’s dharma and vairãgya may  be 
moderate.      He   should   not   keep   the   company   of   someone,   who 
perceives faults in Bhagvãn and His bhaktas, even though that person 
may have intense vairãgya and dharma.” 
 
11.13 
Hearing this, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “The answer is correct.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III || 11 || 245 || 

GADHADÃ III 
- 705 - 
Gadhadã III – 12 
Perceiving Avgun In Bhagvãn And His Sant 
 
12.1 
In  the Samvat year  1884,  on Ashãdh vad 8  [16
th
 July  1827],  Swãmi 
Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in the balcony of the medi of 
His residence in Dãdã Khãchar's darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was dressed 
entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
12.2 
Then,  for  the  benefit  of  His bhaktas, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “A person 
who  desires his  own kalyãn should  not  have  any form  of  pride, such 
as, ‘I have been born in an upper-class family’,  or ‘I am wealthy’,  or ‘I 
am handsome’,  or ‘I am a scholar’.    He  should  not  keep  any  of  these 
beliefs.    In  fact,  even  with  a  humble satsangi,  he  should  behave  as  a 
dãs of a dãs. 
 
12.3 
“Furthermore, even though he may be called a satsangi, a person who 
has  perceived avgun in Bhagvãn or  His bhaktas should  be  known  to 
be like a rabid dog.  Just as a person who is touched by the saliva of a 
rabid dog also become rabid, similarly, if a person listens to the talks 
of   or   keeps   affection   for   someone   who   has   perceived avgun in 
Bhagvãn or   His bhaktas,   then   both   the   person   who   keeps   the 
affection   and   the   listener   become   like   a vimukh.     Then,   just  as 
tuberculosis  is  never  cured  by  any  medicine,  similarly,  the  demonic 
attitude  of  a  person  who  has  perceived avgun in Bhagvãn or  His 
bhaktas is  never  eradicated  from  his  heart.    On  the  other  hand,  a 
person who may have killed countless brãhmans; or may have killed 
countless children; or may have killed countless women; or may have 
killed countless cows; or may have even associated many times with 
the  wife  of  his guru,  can  be  freed  from  these  sins  at  some  time  or 
other.    In  fact,  the shãstras even  describe  the methods  to  do  so.  
However, no shãstra describes methods to be released from the sin of 
perceiving avgun in Bhagvãn or  His bhaktas.  If  a  person  consumes 
poison, or falls into the ocean, or falls from a mountain, or is eaten by 

GADHADÃ III 
- 706 - 
a  demon,  then  he  has  to  die only  once.    However,  a  person  who 
insults Bhagvãn or His bhaktas has to continuously die and be reborn 
for countless millions of years. 
 
12.4 
“At most, a disease leads to the death of the body; or an enemy 
destroys  the  body;  but,  the jeev is  not  destroyed.    However,  by 
insulting Bhagvãn or His bhaktas, the jeev is also destroyed.  Someone 
may  ask, ‘How can the jeev be destroyed?’  Well,  for  example,  a 
hermaphrodite  cannot  be  called  a  man  or  a  woman,  he  can  only  be 
called  impotent.   Similarly,  the jeev of  a  person  who  insults Bhagvãn 
or His bhaktas also becomes impotent; the jeev is never able to make 
an effort for his own kalyãn.  Therefore, his jeev should be known as 
having  been  destroyed.    Knowing  this,  a  person  should  never  insult 
Bhagvãn or His bhaktas. 
 
12.5 
“In addition, a person should not have deep affection for his bodily 
relations,  even  if  they  happen  to  be satsangis.    For  example,  if  a 
snake’s venom falls into some sweetened milk, then whoever drinks 
it will die.  In the same way, even if a person’s bodily relations are 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn,  they are  still mixed  with  venom  (relationships).  
Therefore,   a   person   who   has   affection   for   them   will   definitely 
sacrifice  his kalyãn.    Knowing  this,  a  person  who wishes for his  own 
kalyãn should  not  maintain  affection  for  his  bodily  relations.    In  this 
way,  after  becoming  detached  from  worldly  life  and  having  love  for 
the  holy  feet  of Bhagvãn,  a  person  should  continue  to  engage  in  the 
worship of Bhagvãn. 
 
12.6 
“A person who retains the talk that I have just delivered within his 
heart,  will  never  encounter  obstacles  on  the  path  of kalyãn.    In  fact, 
this talk is like a miraculous technique.” 
 
12.7 
Shreeji Mahãrãj concluded the talk with these words. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III || 12 || 246 || 

GADHADÃ III 
- 707 - 
Gadhadã III – 13 
The Wish Of Bhagvãn Is Our Prãrabdha 
 
13.1 
In  the Samvat year  1884,  on Ashãdh vad 9  [17
th
 July  1827],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  the  veranda  outside  the 
east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was 
dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    Garlands  of mogrã flowers  were 
hanging around His neck, and tassels decorated His pãgh.  A sabhã of 
munis, as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before   Him.    Some of   the munis were   singing kirtans to   the 
accompaniment of a dukad and sarodã.  
 
13.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Please stop singing the kirtans, and let us 
talk  about Bhagvãn.”  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  a  question  to  the muni-
mandal:  “A jeev’s body  is  dependent  upon  the karmas performed  in 
past  lives.    That  is  why  it  is  not  always  so  stable.    For  example, 
sometimes a person remains healthy, and sometimes he becomes ill; 
sometimes  he functions  independently,  and  sometimes  he  becomes 
dependent,  where  he  may  or  may  not  be  able  to  stay  where  he 
chooses;  and  sometimes  he  may  be  able  to  stay  in  the  company  of 
bhaktas, but sometimes he may even be separated from them and be 
forced to live alone.  All of this is due to the influence of karma or kãl.  
In such circumstance, a person’s determination in observing niyams 
becomes unsteady. 
 
13.3 
“Further, if a ruler like the British detains a person; or if a person’s 
mind and indriyas – which are also like the British rulers – keep him 
under  their  control,  then  it  is  uncertain  whether  he  will  stay  in  the 
company of sãdhus or follow the niyams of satsang.  Having said this, 
the shãstras have specifically stated: ‘If a person perfectly possesses all 
four of the qualities of dharma, gnãn, vairãgya, and bhakti, then he can 
be   called   an   ekãntik  bhakta,   and   such   a   person   attains   ultimate 
kalyãn’.    Also,  it  seems  unlikely  that  the  physical  conditions  will 
remain stable under the influence of Kãl and karma.  Therefore, how 

GADHADÃ III 
- 708 - 
can  a bhakta of Bhagvãn maintain  his ekãntik state?    That  is  the 
question.” 
 
13.4 
Then,  Gopãlãnand  Swãmi,  Chaitanyãnand  Swãmi,  Nityãnand  Swãmi, 
Muktãnand Swãmi, Brahmãnand Swãmi, Shuk Muni, and other senior 
sãdhus answered  according  to  whatever  they  felt  was  correct  but 
were unable to answer the question satisfactorily.   
 
13.5 
 Shreeji Mahãrãj then said in reply, “Please listen as I reveal to you 
the  way  in  which  my  belief  of Bhagvãn remains firms.”  He then 
began, “Regardless of how much pain or pleasure comes my way, and 
regardless  of  whether  wealth  or  poverty  comes  my  way,  in  those 
circumstances,  first  I  realise  the  immense  greatness  of Bhagvãn.    On 
seeing the riches and royal wealth of the great kings of this world, it 
is   this   understanding   that   allows   me   to   not   associate   even   the 
slightest  amount  of  significance  to  them  in  my  heart.    I  believe  that 
for  me,  there  is  nothing  greater  than Bhagvãn;  and  so  my  mind  is 
firmly  attached  to  His  holy  feet.    In  fact,  my  love  for Bhagvãn is  so 
firm that even Kãl, karma, and Mãyã are incapable of destroying that 
love.  Even if my own mind attempts to destroy that love for Bhagvãn, 
it cannot be destroyed.  In fact, my love is such that regardless of the 
extent of happiness or misery that may happen to come my way, the 
love is not destroyed. 
 
13.6 
“Also, the natural inclination of my mind is such that I do not at all 
prefer  to  live  in  cities,  in  mansions  or  in  royal  palaces.    On  the 
contrary,   I   very   much   prefer   to   stay   where   there   are   forests, 
mountains,  rivers,  trees,  or  in  some  secluded  place.    I feel  that  it 
would be nice to sit alone in some secluded place and perform dhyãn 
upon Bhagvãn.  That is what I prefer at all times.  In fact, before I had 
the   darshan   of   Rãmãnand   Swãmi,   I   had   already   decided   with 
Muktãnand  Swãmi, ‘After you arrange for me to  have  the  darshan  of 
Rãmãnand Swãmi, the two of us will retire to the forest and constantly 
engage ourselves in the dhyãn of Bhagvãn, and never shall we return to 

GADHADÃ III 
- 709 - 
stay amongst people’.    Such  was  the  determination  in  my  mind  then; 
even now, I feel exactly the same. 
 
13.7 
“In addition, the profound love that I have for Bhagvãn and  His 
bhaktas is so strong that even Kãl, karma, and Mãyã are incapable of 
eradicating  that  love.    In  fact,  even  if  my  own  mind  attempted  to 
eradicate  it,  it  would  definitely  not  be  eradicated  from  my  heart.  
Such is the intense love I have for Bhagvãn and His bhaktas. 
 
13.8 
“Many times I have become disheartened  and  felt  like  leaving  this 
satsang, but I have remained here on seeing the bhaktas; I could in no 
way  abandon  them  and  leave.    In  fact,  I  would  be  unable  to  stay 
where  I  do  not  find  such bhaktas of Bhagvãn,  even  if  someone  were 
to try by a million methods to keep me there.  Regardless of how well 
a person may serve me, I simply cannot get along with someone who 
is not a bhakta of Bhagvãn.  In this way, I have attached my mind with 
profound  love  to Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas;  and  other  than  that 
Bhagvãn,  I  have  no  liking  for  anything else.   If  that  is so,  why should 
love  for Bhagvãn not  remain?    When  I  am  engaged  in kathãs or 
kirtans related to Bhagvãn, I experience such happiness that I feel as 
if I shall become mad due to it.  In fact, whatever calmness remains is 
solely  for  the  benefit  of  the bhaktas;  but  in  the  mind,  the  very  same 
happiness    always    remains;    although    outwardly,    I    behave    in 
accordance with the customs of society. 
 
13.9 
“It is that very Bhagvãn who is the sole controller of this body.  If He 
wishes,  He  may  seat  him  on  an  elephant;  or  if  He  wishes,  He  may 
have it thrown in prison; or if He so wishes, He may even place some 
serious illness in the body.  Despite this, a person should never pray 
before Bhagvãn in the following way:  ‘Mahãrãj!  Please relieve me of 
my  misery’.      This   is   because   we   want   this   body   to   behave   in 
accordance  with  the  wishes  of Bhagvãn;  after  all, Bhagvãn’s wish  is 
our  wish.    We  do  not  want  our  preferences  to  differ  from  the 
preferences  of Bhagvãn even  in  the  slightest  way.   Moreover,  since 
we  have  offered  our  body,  mind,  and  wealth  to Bhagvãn,  then  only 

GADHADÃ III 
- 710 - 
the wish of Bhagvãn is our prãrabdha; besides that, there is no other 
prãrabdha for us.  Therefore, regardless of whatever pain or pleasure 
we  may  encounter  by  the  wish  of Bhagvãn,  we  should  not  become 
disturbed  in  any  way;  we  should  be  pleased  with  whatever  pleases 
Bhagvãn. 
 
13.10 
“Therefore, Bhagvãn Himself  protects  the dharma, gnãn, vairãgya, 
and bhakti of  a bhakta who  has  such  intense  love  for Bhagvãn.  
Occasionally,  due  to  the  prevalence  of  unpleasant  circumstances,  it 
may  outwardly  appear  that  such  a bhakta is  disobeying dharma, 
gnãn, vairãgya, and bhakti, but inwardly, there is no disobedience at 
all.” 
 
13.11 
In  this  way,  by  quoting  His  own  example, Shreeji  Mahãrãj  described 
the understanding of an extremely firm bhakta of Bhagvãn, and how 
he should develop firm love for Bhagvãn. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III || 13 || 247 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 14 
Love And Faith 
The Kãyasth’s Unworthy Desire 
 
14.1 
In  the Samvat year  1884,  on Ashãdh vad 11  [19
th
 July  1827],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  the  veranda  outside  the 
east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was 
dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    Tassels  of  flowers  were  hanging 
from  the pãgh upon  His head,  and  garlands  of  flowers  were hanging 
around His neck.  A sabhã of paramhans, as well as haribhaktas from 
various  places,  had  gathered  before  Him.  Some munis were  singing 
kirtans. 
 
14.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Please stop  the  singing  and  begin  a 
question-answer discussion.” 
 

GADHADÃ III 
- 711 - 
14.3 
Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked with folded hands “Mahãrãj, there is 
nothing more essential than Bhagvãn; yet why does an individual not 
develop deep love for Him?  That is the question.”  
 
14.4 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “He has no wisdom.    If  he  did  have wisdom, 
he  would  think, ‘I have accepted the vow of brahm-chãrya,  yet  the 
desire  to  enjoy  the  pleasures  of  women  still  has  not  disappeared  from 
my  heart.    That  is  very  improper  as  I  have  invariably  enjoyed  the 
pleasures of women when I have taken birth in the 8.4 million life forms 
– and  those  pleasures  have  always  been  much  greater  than  those 
experienced in a human birth’.    When  this jeev was  born  as  a  goat,  it 
must  have  single-handedly  indulged  in  the  pleasures  of  a  thousand 
female goats.  When it took birth as a horse, or a bull, or a buffalo, or 
a king monkey, or indeed any other animal, it must have encountered 
countless  young,  beautiful  females  of  its  own  species.    This  was  not 
due  to prãrabdha,  nor  was  it  due  to Bhagvãn’s grace – it  was  only 
natural.    Moreover,  if  a  person  does  not  worship Bhagvãn,  he  will 
obtain  countless  females  in  whichever  life-form  he  is  born  in.    This 
would not be due to the sevã or pujã of some dev, or to the chanting of 
some mantra;  as  the  opportunity  of  enjoying  women  and  other 
pleasures is natural.   
 
14.5
 This jeev has  become  a dev several  times,  where  it  has  enjoyed  the 
pleasures  of  Dev-Lok;  many  times  it  has  become  an  emperor  of  the 
world  and  enjoyed  countless  pleasures  on  this  earth.    Despites  this, 
the jeev’s craving  to  enjoy  women  and  other  objects  has  still  not 
diminished.  Instead, a person feels that the pleasures of women and 
other   objects   are   extremely   rare   and,   realising   their   immense 
pleasure,  develops  affection  for  them.    That  affection  is  such  that  it 
can  in  no  way  be  eradicated,  however  much  a  person  tries.    It  is 
because  of  this  sin  that  the jeev is  unable  to  develop  deep  love  for 
Bhagvãn. 
 
14.5 
“I have personally seen with my own eyes how the jeev has  such 
impure, worldly desires.  When I was young, I used to go to a mandir 

GADHADÃ III 
- 712 - 
of Shiv in Ayodhyã and sleep there.  One day, a Kãyasth came to offer 
pujã to Shiv and  ask  for  the  following vardãn:   ‘O Mahãrãj!  O Shivji!  
Never grant me a human birth again.  In this human birth, I have taken 
so   many   aphrodisiacs,   yet   I   have   been   unable   to   fully   enjoy   the 
pleasures  of  women  to  my  satisfaction.    Therefore,  O  Shivji!    Please 
grant me the body of a donkey for many lives to come so that I can fully 
enjoy the pleasures of females without shame or restrictions’.  He asked 
for this vardãn from Shivji daily.  So, because of this sin of harbouring 
worldly  desires,  the jeev does  not  develop  love  for Bhagvãn in  any 
way.” 
 
14.6 
Muktãnand Swãmi then asked further, “Mahãrãj, a person who does 
not have wisdom does not develop love for Bhagvãn.  But, what about 
someone who believes that Bhagvãn is the ocean of all bliss, and that 
all  objects  other  than Bhagvãn are  certainly  full  of  only  misery?  
Despite knowing this, why does he not develop love for Bhagvãn?” 
 
14.7 
Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “In either a past life or in this present life, 
that  person  has  been  influenced  by  extremely  unpleasant desh, kãl, 
kriyã,  and sang.    Due  to  this,  he  has  performed  very  intense,  sinful 
karmas that  have  left  impressions  on  his  mind.    Therefore,  despite 
being  able  to  discriminate  between  good  and  bad,  he  is  unable  to 
avoid the bad and develop deep love for Bhagvãn.  Moreover, just as 
the  influence  of  unpleasant desh, kãl, kriyã,  and sang causes  the 
impressions  of  sinful karmas to  influence  the  mind,  similarly,  the 
influence  of  extremely  pleasant desh, kãl, kriyã,  and sang causes  a 
person to perform very intense, pure karmas.  The influence of these 
pure karmas will  destroy  the  very  intense,  sinful karmas.    Only  then 
does a person develop deep love for Bhagvãn.  That is the answer to 
the question.” 
 
14.8 
Then, Ayodhyãprasãdji asked, “Suppose there is a person who is very 
intelligent,  and  whose  knowledge  of  the shãstras is  also  exceptional.  
On the other hand, there is a person who is not so intelligent and who 
has a limited understanding of the shãstras.  Nevertheless, the person 

GADHADÃ III 
- 713 - 
who  is  very  intelligent  falls  from satsang,  whereas  a  person  who  is 
not intelligent remains firm in satsang.  What is the reason for this?” 
 
14.9 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj answered, “There are two types of people in this 
world:  religious and demonic.  Of these, those who are demonic will 
fall  from satsang,  despite  being  exceptionally  intelligent;  whereas 
those who are religious will never fall from satsang, even though they 
may not be intelligent.  For example, if a person sows a seed of chilli 
or the seed of a neem tree or the seed of a shingadiyo vachhnãg plant 
and he waters them daily with sweet water, the chillies will still turn 
out  to  be  spicy;  the  neem  tree  will  still  be  bitter;  and  the shingadiyo 
vachhnãg plant  will  still  be  poisonous.    This  is  because  that  is  the 
nature of the seeds themselves.  On the other hand, if a person sows 
sugarcane,  the  juice  of  the  sugarcane  will  still  be  sweet  despite 
treating  it  with  compost  from  leaves  of  a  neem  tree  and  watering  it 
with bitter water.  In the same way, religious people will always stay 
on  the  path  of Bhagvãn,  and  demonic  people  will  always  turn  away 
from the path of Bhagvãn.” 
 
14.10 
Then, Shuk Muni asked, “How can a person  distinguish  between  a 
religious person and a demonic person?” 
 
14.11 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “In a religious person,  vicious  natures  such 
as kãm, krodh,  and lobh,  are  due  to  the  influence  of  unpleasant 
circumstances.    However,  they  are  destroyed  within  a  short  time 
under the influence of pleasant circumstances.  On the other hand, in 
a  demonic  person,  vicious  natures  such  as kãm, krodh,  and lobh,  are 
never  destroyed.    If  someone  were  to  speak  some  harsh  words  to  a 
demonic  person  even  once,  he  would  not  forget  them  for  as  long  as 
he lives.  Then, if that demonic person were to become a satsangi, he 
would initially appear to be better than all the other bhaktas.  But, he 
would  be  like  silt  that  has  gathered  in  the  region  of  Bhãl – where 
there  was  previously  sea – has  made  the  soil  fertile.    As  long  as  the 
silt  remains, sweet  water  can  be obtained  by  digging  below;  but,  if  a 
person were to dig much deeper, then extremely saline water would 

GADHADÃ III 
- 714 - 
emerge.    In  the  same  way,  even  if  a  demonic  person  has  become  a 
bhakta of Bhagvãn, the moment his wishes are not fulfilled and he is 
even  slightly  disturbed,  then  compared  to  the sevã of  the sãdhus he 
had  previously  performed,  he  would  insult  them  thousands  of  times 
more.  Even then, his mind would not be happy.” 
 
14.12 
Muktãnand Swãmi then asked, “Mahãrãj, you said that a demonic 
person  who  becomes  a bhakta will  remain  in satsang as  long  as  his 
wishes are fulfilled; and if they are not fulfilled, he falls from satsang.  
But,  what  if  he  happens  to  die  before  falling  from satsang?    Will  he 
remain demonic, or will he become religious?” 
 
14.13 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “As long as the demonic person is good when 
he encounters death, and he offers bhakti to Bhagvãn, he will become 
religious and will attain Akshardhãm.” 
 
14.14 
Then, Nrusinhãnand Swãmi asked, “Of the nine types of bhakti, which 
is the best?” 
 
14.15 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Of the nine types of bhakti, whichever type 
helps a person in developing firm attachment to Bhagvãn is the best 
type of bhakti for that particular person.” 
 
14.16 
Then, Gopãlãnand Swãmi asked, “During childhood or during youth, 
what type of company should a person seek?” 
 
14.17 
Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “Both should lovingly keep the company 
of  a  person  who  is  senior  in  age,  is  firm  in dharma, gnãn,  and 
vairãgya; and has deep love for Bhagvãn.” 
 
14.18 
Then Nãjã Jogiyã asked, “Which is the best of the three:  a person 
whose  mind  is  attached  to Bhagvãn out  of  anger,  a  person  whose 
mind  is  attached  to Bhagvãn out  of  fear,  or  a  person  whose  mind  is 
attached to Bhagvãn out of love?” 

GADHADÃ III 
- 715 - 
14.19 
Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “A person whose mind is attached to Bhagvãn 
out of love is the best.” 
 
14.20 
Then, Shivãnand Swãmi asked, “How can a bhakta of Bhagvãn who 
does  not  possess wisdom of  what  is  good  and  bad  as  described  by 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj,  and  who  also  lacks vairãgya,  develop  such  wisdom, 
and also develop vairãgya towards all objects other than Bhagvãn?” 
 
14.21 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If a person develops firm love for Bhagvãn 
from  the  initial  stages,  then  due  to  that  love, wisdom and vairãgya 
will  automatically  develop.    Now,  consider  the  following:    When  a 
person is attached to an object, it is called affection or desire.  Then, if 
someone were to obstruct the gaining of any object for which he has 
affection,  he  would  become  angry  on  that  person.    This  applies  not 
only to humans; even animals express such anger.  For example, due 
to  lust,  a  buffalo  that is  attached  to  a  female  buffalo  will  kill  another 
buffalo that approaches the female; this behaviour is widely observed 
in all types of animals.  In the same way, a person with deep love for 
Bhagvãn immediately  becomes  angry  on  any  object  that  acts  as  an 
obstruction  in  that  love  and  he  immediately  abandons  that  object.  
Therefore,  a  person  who  has  deep  love  for Bhagvãn automatically 
develops vairãgya as well as wisdom.” 
 
14.22 
Again, Shivãnand Swãmi asked, “Suppose there are two types of 
people, both  of  whom  are  intelligent.    Of  these,  one  possesses  faith 
and  accepts  whatever Bhagvãn says;  whereas  the other accepts  only 
those  words  of Bhagvãn that  he  feels  are  appropriate.    Of  the  two, 
who is better?” 
 
14.23 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Only the person  who  possesses  faith  is 
better.   Rãmchandraji has  said  in  the  Rãmãyan, ‘I protect a person 
who  has  firm  faith  in  me – just  as  a  mother protects  her  child’.  
Therefore, only the person with faith is better.” 
 
14.24 
Then, Ãtmãnand Swãmi asked, “In a person’s mind, he is determined 
to  behave  according  to  the  wishes  of Bhagvãn for  the  rest  of  his  life.  

GADHADÃ III 
- 716 - 
However,  he  still  feels, ‘What can a person do for Bhagvãn and His 
sant to earn their trust?’” 
 
14.25 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  explained,  “Firstly,  a  person  earns  the trust   of 
Bhagvãn and His sant when he does not have hatred towards anyone 
and does not feel disheartened, even if he falls severely ill and is not 
cared for very well during that illness.  Secondly, even if he is harshly 
insulted by Bhagvãn and His sant without any fault of his own, he still 
does  not  have  hatred  towards  anyone.    Thirdly,  if  he  were  to  even 
slightly  disobey  his  observance  of  the niyams of  this satsang,  he 
would  feel  extremely  apologetic  and  would  immediately  perform 
prãyshchit.    Also,  even  if  he  were  to  entertain  an  evil  thought  in  his 
mind,  he  would  feel  just  as  apologetic  and  distressed  as  someone 
who  had  happened   to  physically   disobey   the  observance  of   the 
niyams.  A person with these characteristics earns the complete trust 
of Bhagvãn and His sant, and they feel, ‘This person will never fall back 
from satsang’.” 
 
14.26 
Then, Bhagvadãnand Swãmi asked, “How can others recognise a 
bhakta who continuously understands the greatness of Bhagvãn and 
His bhaktas in his mind?” 
 
14.27 
Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “A person who continuously understands 
the  greatness  of Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas in  his  mind  serves  them 
sincerely and lovingly.  He physically bows and touches the feet of all 
the sãdhus.  If a sãdhu were to fall ill, he would massage his head and 
feet  and  also  take  care  of  his  dietary  needs.    If  he  were  to  receive 
some object that he liked, he would first offer it to the sãdhus before 
using  it  for  himself.    A  person,  who  behaves  in  this  way  by  thought, 
word,  and  deed,  should  be  known  to  have  fully  understood  the 
greatness of Bhagvãn and His sant within his heart.” 
 
14.28 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  the sãdhus a question:  “A person may 
possess   intense dharma, gnãn, vairãgya,   and bhakti.      However 
sometimes,   there   may   be   some   relaxation   in   his   observance   of 

GADHADÃ III 
- 717 - 
dharma;  there  may  be  some  attachment  despite  having vairãgya; 
there  may  be  some  reduction  in  his bhakti;  and  attachment  to  his 
body  may  still  remain  despite  having gnãn.    What  can  be  the  reason 
for this?” 
 
14.29 
Gopãlãnand   Swãmi   and  Brahmãnand  Swãmi  replied,  “If  there 
appears to be a flaw in a person who possesses intense dharma, gnãn, 
vairãgya,  and bhakti – a  person  who  can  be  thought  of  as  being  as 
powerful as Bhagvãn Himself – it remains purely out of compassion; 
it is not a flaw.  In fact, when such a great person behaves with bãhya-
drashti,  he  transforms  many jeevs to  the  ranks  of  Jadbharat  and 
Shukji.    Therefore,  such  an  extremely  great  person  behaves  in  a 
worldly way purely out of compassion for the jeevs.” 
 
14.30 
Hearing their reply, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “That is precisely the 
correct answer to the question.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III || 14 || 248 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 15 
Applying Bandages To Wounds 
 
15.1 
In  the Samvat year  1884,  on Ashãdh vad 13  [21
st
 July  1827],  Swãmi 
Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in the balcony of the medi of 
His residence in Dãdã Khãchar's darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was dressed 
entirely  in  white  clothes  and  was  also  wearing  garlands  of mogrã 
flowers  around  His  neck.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
15.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said to Muktãnand Swãmi, “Today, I had a long 
talk with the bhaktas (Jeevu-Bã and Lãdu-Bã) who cook for me.” 
 
15.3 
Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, what did you talk about?” 

GADHADÃ III 
- 718 - 
15.4 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “The talk was that when a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn sits to perform the mãnsi pujã of Bhagvãn or sits to perform 
dhyãn upon Bhagvãn,  he  remembers  the  times  in  the  past  when  his 
jeev has  surrendered  to  the panch-vishays due  to  the  influence  of 
unpleasant  circumstances  or  the  influence  of  vicious  natures.    For 
example, a warrior who returns injured from the battlefield rests on 
a  bedstead  due  to  his  wound.    However,  until  his  wounds  are  not 
dressed  with  bandages,  the  pain  of  the  wounds  does  not  decrease 
and  he  is  not  able  to  sleep.    Only  when  bandages  are  applied  to  his 
wounds is he relieved of his pain and only then is he able to sleep.  In 
the same way, the jeev has been ‘wounded’ by the panch-vishays due 
to the influence of unpleasant desh, kãl, kriyã, and sang.  Whichever of 
the nine types of bhakti relieves the pain of these ‘wounds’ caused by 
the vishays and  makes  a  person  unaware  of  the vishays themselves, 
should be thought of as the application of a bandage to the ‘wounds’.  
Also,   that   particular   type   of bhakti should   be   known   to   be   his 
strength in worshipping Bhagvãn. 
 
15.5 
“Then, abiding by that particular strength, a person should engage in 
mãnsi pujã or  the  mental  chanting  of Bhagvãn’s name.    In  fact, 
whatever  he  may  do,  he  should  do  so  within  his  own  particular 
strength.  He will benefit tremendously as a result of this. 
 
15.6 
“However, just as a wounded warrior experiences no peace until his 
wounds are bandaged, similarly, if a person fails to recognise his own 
particular strength, he will not experience any happiness at all during 
bhajan and smaran, and the pain due to the ‘wounds’ caused by the 
vishays will not be relieved.  Therefore, after recognising which of the 
nine  types  of bhakti cause  his  mind  to  be  fixed  on Bhagvãn and 
prevents  him  from  indulging  in  any  thoughts  other  than  those  of 
Bhagvãn,  that bhakta should  realise, ‘This is my particular strength’.  
Then, he should keep that type of bhakti predominant.  This method 
is a universal principle.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III || 15 || 249 || 

GADHADÃ III 
- 719 - 
Gadhadã III – 16 
Bhakti Like A Pati Vratã 
 
16.1 
In  the Samvat year  1884,  on Ashãdh vad Amãs [23
rd
 July  1827], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   the   veranda 
outside  the  east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.  
He was dressed entirely in white clothes.  He was wearing garlands of 
mogrã flowers around His neck, and extremely beautiful tassels were 
hanging from His pãgh.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
16.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “I ask a question to the entire muni-
mandal and  to  all  the grahastha  bhaktas;  whoever  can  reply  may  do 
so.  The question is as follows:  It does not take very long for a bhakta 
of Bhagvãn to  avoid  the  company  of  a  person  who  is  full  of avgun.  
But,  how  is  it  possible  to  avoid  the  company  of  a  person  with 
extremely noble gun?  After all, a person naturally develops affection 
for  a  person  with gun,  regardless  of  whether  he  is  a  relative  or  not.  
Moreover, affection that is formed, due to the influence of those gun, 
cannot be eradicated, however much a person tries.  Therefore, how 
does  a bhakta of Bhagvãn prevent  the  development  of  affection  for 
anyone  other  than Bhagvãn,  regardless  of  the gun of  that  person?  
That is the question.” 
 
16.3 
The senior sãdhus replied according to their understanding, but were 
unable to answer Shreeji Mahãrãj’s question. 
 
16.4 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Allow me to answer.  The answer is as 
follows:    A pati vratã is  not  even  slightly  impressed  in  her  mind  on 
seeing  other  rich, handsome,  or  young  men,  even  if  her  husband  is 
poor,  ugly,  ill,  or old.    If  she  does  happen  to  affectionately  look  at  or 
laugh  with  other  men,  then  she  breaks  her pati  vratã vow.    If  some 
guests  were  to  come  to  the  house  of  that pati  vratã,  she  would  offer 
them  food  and  water.    If  she  offers  food  and  water  to  some  male 

GADHADÃ III 
- 720 - 
relative of her husband, she does so knowing him to be related to her 
husband,  but  the  affection  she  has  for  all  other  men  does  not  even 
come close to the love she has for her husband; nor does she see gun 
in  other  men  as  she  sees  in  her  own  husband.    Moreover,  she  acts 
according to the wishes of her own husband.  Such is the firm fidelity 
that a pati vratã wife has towards her husband. 
 
16.5 
“In the same way, a bhakta should  have  firm  loyalty  to Bhagvãn.  
Specifically,  like  a  woman  who  is  a pati  vratã,  he  would  never 
develop  the  same  love  towards  even  other mukta sãdhus – however 
great they may be – as he has developed towards whichever murti of 
Bhagvãn he  has  had  the darshan of.    He  does  not develop  love  for 
other avatãrs of  his ishta-dev.    He  keeps  love  only  for  the murti that 
he has attained, and he acts according to His wishes only.  If he does 
happen  to  respect  others,  it is  only  because  of  their  association  with 
his Bhagvãn.  A person who has such faithful bhakti towards his own 
ishta-dev,  never  develops  affection  on  seeing  others,  even  though  he 
may have many gun.  
 
16.6
 “For  example, Hanumãnji is   a bhakta of Shree Rãmchandraji.  
Following the avatãr of Rãm, there have been many other avatãrs of 
Bhagvãn, but Hanumãnji’s bhakti has been like that of a woman who 
observes  the  vow  of  fidelity,  as  he  has  remained  faithful  to  only 
Rãmchandraji.    This  is  why Hanumãnji’s bhakti is  considered  to  be 
like  that  of  a pati  vratã.    The bhakti of  a bhakta of Bhagvãn who  has 
such fidelity can be said to be like that of a pati vratã.  Conversely, if a 
person does not have fidelity, his bhakti can be said to be like that of 
a  prostitute.    Therefore,  a  person  should  not  knowingly  engage  in 
bhakti that  would  cause  him  to  be  disgraced.    Instead,  a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn should thoughtfully engage in faithful bhakti – like that of a 
pati vratã.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III || 16 || 250 || 
 

GADHADÃ III 
- 721 - 
Gadhadã III – 17 
The Story Of Bharatji 
 
17.1 
In  the Samvat year  1884,  on Shrãvan sud 6  [30
th
 July  1827],  Shreeji 
Mahãrãj  was sitting  on  the  veranda  outside  the  east-facing  rooms  of 
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was dressed entirely in white 
clothes  and  was  wearing  garlands  of  flowers  around  His  neck.    A 
sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had 
gathered before Him. 
 
17.2 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “There  is  no  story  in  the  Shreemad 
Bhãgvat  as  incredible  as  the  story  of  Bharatji.    This  is  because 
Bharatji  was  the  son  of Rushabh-Dev  Bhagvãn,  and  for  the  specific 
purpose   of   realising Bhagvãn,   he   gave   up   his   kingdom,   which 
consisted  of  the  whole  world,  and  retired  to  the  forest.    Then,  while 
engaged  in  the  worship  of Bhagvãn,  he  developed  affection  for  a 
young deer.  As a result, his mind’s vrutti took the form of that deer.  
As  a  result,  despite  his  greatness,  Bharatji  was  reborn  as  a  deer  due 
to the sin of that attachment. 
 
17.3 
“As a matter of fact, there are countless types of sins; but for a bhakta 
of Bhagvãn,  of  all  those  sins,  having  affection  for  anything  except 
Bhagvãn is an extremely great sin.  Therefore, if a wise person thinks 
over this story of Bharatji, he becomes extremely fearful in his heart 
with  the  thought, ‘What if I develop affection for anything other than 
Bhagvãn?’  In this way, he becomes extremely afraid. 
 
17.4 
“Then, when Bharatji gave up the body of the deer, he was born in a 
brãhman family.      Then,   out   of   fear   of   developing   affection   for 
anything  other  than Bhagvãn,  he  paid  no  attention  at  all  to  worldly 
affairs and  deliberately  behaved  as  a  madman.    He  lived  in  a  way 
where he could maintain his vrutti constantly on Bhagvãn.” 
 
17.5 
After delivering this talk, Shreeji Mahãrãj left to attend the ãrti. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III || 17 || 251 || 

GADHADÃ III 
- 722 - 
Gadhadã III – 18 
Worldly Desires Become Old 
 
18.1 
In  the Samvat year  1884,  on Shrãvan vad 10  [17
th
 August  1827], 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  the  veranda  outside  the  east-facing 
rooms  of  Dãdã  Khãchar’s darbãr in   Gadhadã.      He   was   dressed 
entirely  in  white  clothes.    Garlands  of  flowers  were  hanging  around 
His neck, and tassels of flowers were hanging from His pãgh.  A sabhã 
of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before Him. 
 
18.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj’s nephew, Raghuvirji, asked a question:  “Why 
does the jeev’s condition during the svapna state not remain the same 
as it is during the jãgrat state?” 
 
18.3 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The jeev behaves in the svapna state exactly 
as  it does  in  the jãgrat state.    After  all,  the  same  types  of  worldly 
desire, which appear while awake, spring forth in dreams as well.” 
 
18.4 
Then, Nirlobhãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, many times, objects that 
have  never  been  seen  or  heard  in  the jãgrat state,  spring  forth  in 
dreams.  What may be the reason for this?” 
 
18.5 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  explained,  “If  objects  that  have  never  been 
previously  seen  or  heard  appear  in  the svapna state,  it  is  due  to 
embedded desires created by karmas performed in past lives.” 
 
18.6 
Then,  Akhandãnand  Swãmi  asked,  “Mahãrãj,  for  a  person  who 
becomes  a bhakta of Bhagvãn,  how  long  does  the  force  of karmas 
performed in past lives remain?” 
 
18.7 
Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “When that person comes into contact 
with  a sat-purush,  the  embedded desires  created  by  his  past karmas 
gradually   wear   away   as   he   consistently   associates   with   him.  
Eventually,  he  reaches  a  stage  where  the  desires  that  give  rise  to 

GADHADÃ III 
- 723 - 
births and deaths no longer remain.  For example, grains of rice that 
are  three  to  four  years old  can  be  eaten;  but  if  they  are  sown,  they 
would  not  grow.    In  the  same  way,  when  the  embedded  desires 
generated  by  the  previously  performed karmas degenerate,  they  do 
not lead to further births and deaths. 
 
18.8 
“However, a person may ask, ‘How does a person  recognise  whether 
those embedded desires have degenerated or not?’  Well, consider  the 
analogy  of  a  contest  between  two  men  armed  with  shields  and 
swords.    As  long  as  both  can  withstand  each  other,  the  strength  of 
both appears to be equal.  But, the moment a person draws back, he 
is  said  to  have  been  defeated.    Similarly,  for  a bhakta of Bhagvãn,  as 
long  as  thoughts  related  to Bhagvãn and  the  thoughts  related  to  the 
vishays appear to be equal, he should realise his worldly desires to be 
more   powerful.  However,   when   thoughts   related   to Bhagvãn 
displace   those   related   to   the vishays,  he  should   realise   that   his 
worldly desires have reduced.” 
 
18.9 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  asked  the paramhans a question:  “How can a 
bhakta,  who  no  longer identifies himself  with  the body  and  who  has 
developed   hatred   for   the panch-vishays,   be   recognised   by   other 
bhaktas?” 
 
18.10 
Muktãnand Swãmi replied, “Mahãrãj, we are incapable of answering 
your question.  Please be compassionate and answer it yourself.” 
 
18.11 
So, Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Whether he is a grahastha or a tyãgi, a 
bhakta of Bhagvãn who no longer believes himself to be the body and 
whose attachment for the panch-vishays has been eradicated, may be 
required  to  behave  as  if  he  is  the  body  depending  on Bhagvãn’s 
instructions to him; he may also have to indulge in the panch-vishays 
if necessary.  For example, a frail bull can be made to stand with the 
support of a stick and by people holding it by its horn and tail.  But, it 
will   remain   standing   only   as   long   as   someone  holds   it   up;   the 
moment  it  is  released,  it  will  fall  to  the  ground.    Similarly,  a  person 

GADHADÃ III 
- 724 - 
who is free of worldly desires engages in activities only to the extent 
of the instructions given by Bhagvãn. 
 
18.12
 In  another  example,  take  a  person  with  a  bow  and  arrow  in  hand.  
The bow bends as the person pulls back the string; when he releases 
the  arrow,  the  bow  becomes  slack  again.    In  the same  way,  a  person 
free of worldly desires engages himself in activities only to the extent 
of Bhagvãn’s wish,  but  never  does  he  do  anything  which  disobeys 
that.  On the other hand, when a person with worldly desires engages 
in activities, he is unable to detach himself from those activities of his 
own accord; he is unable to do so even when Bhagvãn instructs him.  
These are the characteristics of a person free of worldly desires and a 
person with worldly desires.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III || 18 || 252 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 19 
Two Undesirable Traits Of A Tyãgi 
 
19.1 
In  the Samvat year  1884,  on Shrãvan vad 13  [20
th
 August  1827], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress  with 
cylindrical  pillow  that  had  been  placed  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on 
the veranda outside the west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr 
in Gadhadã.  He was dressed entirely in white clothes.  Also, garlands 
of mogrã and karnikãr were  hanging  around  His  neck.    A sabhã of 
munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before Him. 
 
19.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “A bhakta who  has  abandoned  worldly 
life  may  possess  two  negative  traits  which  are  not  appropriate  for 
him in this satsang; the first is lust and the second is affection for his 
relatives.    In  my  eyes,  a  person  who  possesses  these  two  negative 
traits is like an animal.  Of these two, I have an extreme repulsion for 
a person who has excessive affection for his relatives. 

GADHADÃ III 
- 725 - 
19.3 
“For this reason, a person who has abandoned worldly life should not 
keep  even  the  slightest  amount of  affection  for  his  relatives.    This  is 
because having affection for bodily relatives is a greater sin than the 
five  great  sins.    Therefore,  a tyãgi  bhakta of Bhagvãn should  realise 
his own chaitanya to be distinct from both the body and the relatives 
of the body.  He should believe, ‘I am the ãtmã; I have no relations at 
all  with  anyone’.      In   fact,   the   relatives   of   this   body   should   be 
considered  together  with  the  relatives  of  the  8.4  million  types  of 
previous life forms.  If a person does try to understand the greatness 
of  his  relatives,  knowing  them  to  be satsangis,  then  since  there  is 
already  some  affection  due  to  the  fact  that  they  are  related,  he 
develops  more  affection  for  them  than  he  has  for Bhagvãn and  the 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn.  Therefore, if a person does keep affection for his 
relatives  knowing  them  to  be bhaktas of Bhagvãn,  towards  whom 
affection is natural, then his life becomes useless. 
 
19.4 
“Moreover, it is also natural for a person to develop affection for 
those   who   perform   his sevã,   even   though   they   may   not   be   his 
relatives.  So, a person who is wise should not keep affection towards 
a  person  who  is  serving  him,  even  if  that  person  happens  to  be  a 
bhakta of Bhagvãn.  For example, if a snake has released venom into 
sweetened milk,  the mixture  also  becomes  poisonous.   Similarly, out 
of self-interest, a person should not keep affection towards someone 
who  performs  his sevã,  even  if  the  person  serving  happens  to  be  a 
bhakta.    This  is  because  his jeev becomes  attached  due  to  that sevã.  
Then,  just  as  he  thinks  about Bhagvãn, he  also  begins  to  think  about 
the person who serves his needs.  For that person, this in itself is an 
obstacle  in  his  worship  of Bhagvãn – just  as  the  young  deer  itself 
becomes avidyã (mãyã) for Bharatji.  In this way, a bhakta of Bhagvãn 
should  totally  avoid  all  those  who  obstruct  his  worship  of Bhagvãn, 
knowing them to be avidyã.” 
 
19.5 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then concluded by adding, “The paramhans and  all 
the sãnkhya-yogi bhaktas should  daily  say  and  listen  to  this  talk 
which  I  have  just  delivered.    Specifically,  the  senior  member  of  a 

GADHADÃ III 
- 726 - 
mandal should daily narrate this talk, and others should listen.  If the 
senior  person  fails  to  do  so,  he  should  do upvãs on  that  day.    Those 
who  do  not  come  to  listen  to  that  talk  of Bhagvãn with shraddhã 
should  also  do upvãs.    Please  remember  these  words  firmly  in  your 
lives.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 19 || 253 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 20 
Svabhãv And Vãsnã 
 
20.1 
In  the Samvat year  1884,  on  the  night  of Shrãvan vad Amãs [22
nd
 
August  1827],  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  in  His 
residence in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed 
entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of sãdhus,  as  well  as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
20.2 
Then, Dinã-Nãth Bhatt asked a question:  “Mahãrãj, Kãl is  the  power 
of Bhagvãn,  and karma refers  to  the  actions  performed  by  the jeev.  
But, what exactly is svabhãv?” 
 
20.3 
Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “The karmas that  the jeev has  performed 
during  past  lives  have  fully  developed  and  have  become  absorbed 
within the jeev.  Just as fire ‘enters’ iron, similarly, those karmas have 
developed and have become one with the jeev.  It is those karmas that 
are known as svabhãv, or vãsnã, or prakruti.” 
 
20.4 
Muktãnand Swãmi then asked, “Mahãrãj, the karmas which  have 
become  absorbed  within  the jeev,  are  called svabhãv or vãsnã.    But, 
how does a person eradicate vãsnã?” 
 
20.5 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “It appears that the only means to do so is by 
performing  the bhakti of Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn,  coupled  with  the 

GADHADÃ III 
- 727 - 
ãtmã-nishthã.    If  a  person  offers bhakti to Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn 
without ãtmã-nishthã,  then  just  as  he  has  love  for Bhagvãn,  he  will 
also   develop   love   for   other   material   objects.      Therefore, bhakti 
accompanied  by ãtmã-nishthã is  the  only  means  to  eradicate vãsnã.  
However,  even  a  person  who  has ãtmã-nishthã may  be  disturbed  by 
unpleasant  circumstances,  just  like  an  ignorant  person.    However, 
such disturbances do not last long.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 20 || 254 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 21 
Dharma And Ekãntik Dharma  
 
21.1 
In  the Samvat year  1884,  on Bhãdarvã sud 9  [31
st
 August  1827], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was sitting  on  a  mattress  with  a 
cylindrical  pillow  that  had  been  placed  on  a  decorated  bedstead 
outside the west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  
He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes,  and  garlands  of chameli 
flowers  were  hanging  around His  neck.    A sabhã of  the  entire muni-
mandal,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before Him. 
 
21.2 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  requested  Gopãlãnand  Swãmi  and  Shuk  Muni 
to begin a question-answer discussion. 
 
21.3 
Then, Shuk Muni asked Gopãlãnand Swãmi, “It is through offering 
bhakti to Bhagvãn that  the jeev crosses Bhagvãn’s Mãyã and  attains 
Akshardhãm.    Through dharma,  it  attains  Dev-Lok;  but  once  the 
rewards  it  has  accumulated  are  exhausted,  the jeev falls  from  Dev-
Lok.  Now, whenever there is a decline in dharma, Bhagvãn assumes 
an avatãr for  the  purpose  of  restoring bhakti.    However,  it  appears 
that  whatever  can  be  attained  through bhakti cannot  be  attained 
through dharma.  Therefore, how can the level of dharma be elevated 
to the status of bhakti?  That is the question.” 

GADHADÃ III 
- 728 - 
21.4 
Gopãlãnand  Swãmi  began  to  answer  that  question.    In  whatever  he 
said, dharma became a  component  of bhakti,  but in  no  way  could he 
elevate the level of dharma to the status of bhakti. 
 
21.5 
On    hearing    this,    Shreeji    Mahãrãj    laughed    a    great    deal,    and 
commented, “To answer that question is difficult indeed.  Therefore, 
allow me to answer it.”  He then explained, “Dharma is of two types:  
One  is nivrutti dharma and  the  other  is pravrutti dharma.  In  turn, 
these two types of dharma can either be related to Bhagvãn or not to 
Bhagvãn.  Of these two, the type of dharma that is related to Bhagvãn 
is  the  one  that  was  adopted  by Nãrad,  the Sanakãdik,  Shukji,  Dhruv, 
Prahlãd,  and  Ambrish.    It  is  this dharma that  is  known  as bhãgvat 
dharma or ekãntik dharma.    In  fact,  this  type  of dharma is  not 
different  from bhakti;  they  are  both  one.    The  type  of dharma that 
avatãrs of Bhagvãn come  to  establish  is  this  very  same dharma.    On 
the  other  hand,  the dharma of a person’s varna and ãshram alone  is 
extremely   inferior   compared   to bhãgvat dharma,   because   it   is 
through bhãgvat  dharma that  the jeev crosses Bhagvãn’s Mãyã and 
attains  the dhãm of Purushottam.    Therefore,  the  status  of bhãgvat 
dharma and bhakti is  the  same,  and  the  rewards  of  both  are  exactly 
the  same  as  well;  so,  the  greatness  of bhakti and dharma are  the 
same.  In comparison, the dharma of a person’s varna and ãshram on 
its own is extremely weak, and its rewards are temporary.” 
 
21.6 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then continued, “In my opinion, even if I try to 
develop  affection  for  anyone  other  than Bhagvãn and  His ekãntik 
bhaktas, I cannot do so.  I also feel that my strength is similar to that 
of  Jadbharat,  Shukdevji, Dattãtrey,  and Rushabh-Dev Bhagvãn.    As  a 
result,  I  also  prefer  to  stay  only  in  forests,  mountains,  and  jungles;  I 
do  not  like  to  stay  in  large  towns  or  cities.    This  is  my  inherent 
nature.  Despite this, I stay in the midst of thousands of people for the 
sake of Bhagvãn and His bhaktas.  However, I remain just as detached 
here  as  I  would  if  I  were  living  in  the  forests.    I  do  not  stay  amidst 
thousands  of  people  out  of  any  self-interest;  it  is  for  the  sake  of 
Bhagvãn and His bhaktas that I stay in the midst of people.  No matter 

GADHADÃ III 
- 729 - 
how much pravrutti I may have to engage myself in for the sake of the 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn, I still consider it to be nivrutti. 
 
21.7 
“Moreover, I do not see the flaws of a bhakta of Bhagvãn, however 
much  at  fault  he  may  be.    I  believe  that  even  if  there  are  some 
intrinsic,   minor   flaws   in   a bhakta of Bhagvãn, a   person   should 
overlook them.  However, if those flaws are in himself, then he should 
make an effort to eradicate them.  Also, if that type of flaw appears in 
a bhakta of Bhagvãn, he  should  not  take  note of  that  flaw.    A  person 
should  perceive  flaws  in  a bhakta only  if  he  were  to  lapse  in  his 
observance of some major vartmãn, but not on account of some other 
minor flaw.   
 
21.8 
“A  person should  also  not  be  pleased  by  defeating  a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn in   arguments.      Instead,   he   should   derive   pleasure   in 
deliberately losing to him.  A person who does engage in an argument 
and defeats a bhakta of Bhagvãn is a sinner worse than someone who 
has committed the five great sins. 
 
21.9 
“In addition, I do not like even the sight of a person who speaks 
unkindly  of  a bhakta of Bhagvãn before  me.    In  fact,  I  do  not  enjoy 
food or water offered by a person who perceives flaws in a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn.  If he does do so, then even if he happens to be my relative, I 
still develop an intense dislike for him.  This is because in reality, we 
are the ãtmã; so, why should we keep affection for our body and the 
relatives of the body?  We have developed affection for Bhagvãn and 
His bhaktas believing  ourselves  to  be  an ãtmã,  not  out  of  the  belief 
that we are the body. 
 
21.10 
“The inner enemies, such as kãm, krodh, lobh, moh,  will  certainly 
distress a person who is unable to behave as the ãtmã.  Therefore, if a 
person  offers bhakti without  attaining ãtmã-nishthã,  his  true  nature 
is  sure  to  be  exposed  in  this satsang.    This  is  because  this satsang is 
alokik,  and  all  these satsangis are  exactly  like Bhagvãn’s pãrshads 
residing  in Shvet-Dvip, Vaikunth,  and Golok.    I  take  oath  on Bhagvãn 

GADHADÃ III 
- 730 - 
and  His bhaktas that  I  realise  these satsangis to  be  the  same  as  the 
pãrshads of Bhagvãn residing in the divya Akshardhãm. 
 
21.11 
“However, a person whose gnãn, vairãgya, dharma,  and bhakti are 
not  extremely  firm  will  most  certainly  fall  back  in satsang.    For 
example,   a   thread   dipped   in   wax   remains   stiff   in   winter   and 
monsoon,  but  when  summer  comes,  it  becomes  loose.    In  the  same 
way,  monsoon  and  winter  represent  the  period  when  the bhaktas 
here  are  happy  in  every  way  and  are  also honoured  in satsang.  
During  that  period, gnãn, vairãgya, dharma,  and bhakti appear  to  be 
very intense.  However, with the arrival of summer – the period when 
a bhakta is  insulted  in satsang or   when   he   becomes   physically 
distressed – his gnãn, vairãgya, dharma, and bhakti become loose like 
the thread dipped in wax.  Even then, I do not abandon such a person.  
However,  he  becomes  obliged  to  leave satsang of  his  own  accord.  
Then, even if he is supposedly a satsangi, he does not experience the 
bliss of satsang within. 
 
21.12 
“For  this  reason,  a  person  should  practise satsang with  intense 
firmness after attaining ãtmã-nishthã; he should not practise satsang 
in such a way that affection for his body and his relatives persists.  To 
continue  the  analogy,  a  thread of  gold  remains  the  same  in  all  six 
seasons;  it  does  not  become  loose  even  during  the  heat  of  summer.  
Similarly, when a person’s satsang is  firm,  regardless  of  the  amount 
of  misery  that  he  may  encounter,  and  however  many  times  he  is 
insulted  in satsang,  his  mind  never  turns  away  from satsang.    Only 
such  loyal satsangi Vaishnavs are  my  relatives;  and  I  wish  to  stay  in 
Krishna Bhagvãn’s dhãm.    This  is  my  decision,  and  all  of  you  should 
also make the same decision. 
 
21.13 
“I say this because as you have all become my ãshrit, I should tell you 
that which is beneficial to you.  After all, a true friend is a person who 
tells  us  that  which  benefits  us,  even  if  it  may  appear  to  be  hurtful.  
Please realise this as the characteristic of a true friend.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 21 || 255 || 

GADHADÃ III 
- 731 - 
Gadhadã III – 22 
Loving Bhakti 
 
22.1 
In  the Samvat year  1884,  on Bhãdarvã vad 4  [9
th
 September  1827], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   the   veranda 
outside the west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  
He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    Tassels  of  white  flowers 
were  hanging  from  his pãgh,  and  garlands  of  white  flowers  were 
hanging   around   His   neck.      A sabhã of paramhans,   as   well   as 
haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered  before  Him.    Some 
paramhans were  singing  a vishnupad to  the  accompaniment  of  a 
dukad and sarodã.    Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  in  the sabhã with 
antar-drashti. 
 
22.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “The strength of profound, loving bhakti 
in  a bhakta of Bhagvãn, as  described  in  this kirtan,  is  the strength of 
Jhinã-Bhãi,  and  it  was  the  strength  of  Parvat-Bhãi  and  Mulji  Brahm-
Chãri as well.  While keeping antar-drashti, I was thinking that there 
must also be others in this satsang with the same strength.  A person 
who   develops   this   strength   of   profound,   loving bhakti loses   all 
attachment to the panch-vishays and is able to maintain ãtmã-nishthã 
without even having to try.” 
 
22.3 
Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Narsinh Mehtã worshipped Shree 
Krishna Bhagvãn with a sense of friendship, whereas many bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn,  such  as Nãrad,  worshipped Bhagvãn with sevã.    Of  these 
two  types  of bhaktas,  whose bhakti should  be  regarded  as  being 
better?” 
 
22.4 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “The  type  of bhakti offered  by  Narsinh 
Mehtã,  the gopis, Nãrad,  and  the Sanakãdik is  not  of  two  types;  in 
reality, it is of one type.  After all, the body – be it male or female – is 
worldly  and  perishable.  However,  the jeevãtmã,  the  worshipper,  is 
neither male nor female, but is chetan.  When the jeevãtmã leaves its 
body  and  travels  to  the dhãm of Bhagvãn, it  assumes  a svarup 
according    to    the    wish    of Bhagvãn;    or,    depending    upon    the 

GADHADÃ III 
- 732 - 
opportunity   for sevã that   arises   there,   that bhakta assumes   an 
appropriate svarup and performs the sevã of Bhagvãn accordingly. 
 
22.5 
“However, if a bhakta of Bhagvãn develops  the  same  attachment  to 
wealth, women and other objects as he has towards Bhagvãn, then he 
cannot be called a loyal bhakta of Bhagvãn.  Having become a bhakta 
of Bhagvãn, if   a   person   commits   sins   and   accumulates   harmful 
desires in satsang itself while offering bhakti, then those sins become 
embedded in him – as if etched in iron.  Moreover, a greater sin than 
associating  with  the  wife of  another  man  due  to  the  influence  of  evil 
company is to look at a bhakta of Bhagvãn lustfully while in satsang.  
Therefore,  a  person  who  wishes  to  develop  deep  attachment  to 
Bhagvãn should not allow any type of sin to remain in his mind.  This 
is  because  female satsangi bhaktas are  to be viewed as a person’s 
own  mother,  sister,  or  daughter.    Those  who  look at  women  of  their 
own family lustfully are the extremely evil sinners in this world.  So, a 
person who looks at bhaktas lustfully is an evil sinner and will never 
be  released  from  that  sin.    That  is  why  a  person  who  wishes  to 
become  a rasik bhakta should  become  a rasik bhakta after  avoiding 
this kind of sin. 
 
22.6 
“Having  said  this,  the  greatest  of  all  sins  is  perceiving  faults  in 
Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas,  because  due  to  that  fault-finding  attitude, 
hatred is created towards them.  Even if a person has killed millions 
of  cows,  consumed  alcohol  and  meat,  and  committed  adultery  with 
the wife of his guru countless times, he can still be released from such 
sins at some time or other.  However, a person who insults Bhagvãn 
and  His bhaktas will  never  be  released  from  his  sin.    Then,  if  the 
person insulting Bhagvãn and His bhaktas is a male, he will become a 
male  demon;  or  if  female,  she  will  become  a  female  demon.    Then, 
even after countless lives, that person will never stop being a demon 
and will never become a bhakta of Bhagvãn. 
 
22.7 
“Furthermore,  a  person  who  has  already  insulted  a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn and  whose  insulting  attitude  has  become  established  will 

GADHADÃ III 
- 733 - 
under  no  circumstances  be  able  to eradicate  that  attitude.    On  the 
other   hand,   another   person   who   is   in   the   process   of   insulting, 
realises, ‘I have committed a great sin by insulting Bhagvãn and His 
bhaktas;  therefore  I  am  extremely  evil,  and  Bhagvãn  and  His  bhaktas 
are extremely great’.  When a person sees the qualities of others and 
sees  faults  within  himself  in  this  way,  then  any  sins  he  may  have 
committed will be eradicated, however great they may be. 
 
22.8 
“No other sin displeases and hurts Bhagvãn more  than  the  sin  of 
insulting  His bhaktas.    When  Jay  and  Vijay  insulted  the Sanakãdik in 
Vaikunth, Bhagvãn immediately  rushed  to  the Sanakãdik and  told 
them, ‘Whoever insults sãdhus like you is my enemy.  Therefore, you 
have  done  well  in  giving  a  curse  to  Jay  and  Vijay.    In  fact,  if  my  own 
hand  were  to  harm  brãhmans  like  you,  then  even  I  would  cut  off  my 
hand; so what can I say to others?’  This is what Vishnu Bhagvãn said 
to  the Sanakãdik.    As  a  result,  Jay  and  Vijay  became  demons  due  to 
the  sin  of insulting  the  devout bhaktas of Bhagvãn. Others  who have 
also  insulted bhaktas of Bhagvãn have  all  fallen  from their  high 
position – a  fact  that  is  well  noted  in  the shãstras.    Therefore,  a 
person who desires the best for himself should not insult the bhaktas 
of Bhagvãn.    If  a  person  does  happen to  knowingly  or  unknowingly 
insult someone, then he should bow at that person’s feet, pray to him, 
and act in a way that pleases him.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 22 || 256 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 23 
Mãnsi Pujã 
 
23.1 
In the Samvat year 1885, on the night of Ãso sud Punam [22
nd
 October 
1828], Swãmi Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a decorated 
bedstead  that  had  been  placed  in  the  yard  of  His  residence  in  Dãdã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various 
places, had gathered before Him. 

GADHADÃ III 
- 734 - 
23.2 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj,  out  of  compassion,  addressed  all  the bhaktas 
and said, “A person who is a bhakta of Bhagvãn daily  performs  the 
mãnsi pujã of Bhagvãn.   A person should perform that mãnsi pujã in 
different ways, depending on the three seasons: summer, winter, and 
monsoon.  
 
23.3 
“During the four months of summer, a person should perform pujã by 
first bathing Bhagvãn with cool, fragrant, pure water.  He should then 
offer Him a beautiful, washed, thin, white khes to wear.  After seating 
Bhagvãn on a beautiful seat, His whole body should be smeared with 
fragrant  sandalwood  from  the  Malay  mountains,  which  has  been 
collected   in   a   bowl   after   forming   it   into   a paste.      Firstly,   the 
sandalwood  paste  should  be  smeared  on  His  forehead  and  closely 
observed;  then  the  paste  should  be  smeared  on  His  chest,  stomach, 
thighs,  calves,  and  other  parts  of  His  body.    Those  parts  should  also 
be observed.  Then, beautiful kum-kum should be applied on His holy 
feet  as  well  as  on  the  soles  of  His  feet,  and  they  too  should  then  be 
observed.  Then, garlands of fragrant flowers, such as mogrã, chameli, 
champã,  and  roses,  as  well  as  various  jewellery,  and bãjubandh and 
berkhã made of flowers should be offered.  A fine cloth that is not too 
heavy  and  is  as  white  as  a mogrã flower  should  be  tied  around  His 
head;  and  a  beautiful,  white  cloth  which  is  fine  and  light,  should  be 
wrapped around His body.  Then, he should embrace Bhagvãn – once, 
or  twice,  or  according  to  the  degree  of  his  love.    Then,  he  should 
touch Bhagvãn’s holy  feet  to  his  own  chest  and  head.    During  the 
embrace, the sandalwood paste on Bhagvãn’s body, as well as parts of 
the garlands of flowers, may stick to his own body; and kum-kum may 
also stick as a result of touching Bhagvãn’s holy feet to his own chest 
and   head.      All   this   should   be   visualised,   and   he   should   feel, 
‘Sandalwood paste, kum-kum,  and  garlands  blessed  by  Bhagvãn  have 
touched my body!’ 
 
23.4 
“During the four months of  winter,  a  person should  perform pujã by 
first  bathing Bhagvãn with  warm  water,  and  then  offering  Him  a 
white khes to  wear.    He  should  then  seat Bhagvãn on  a  decorated 

GADHADÃ III 
- 735 - 
bedstead  with  a  velvet  mattress  that  has  been  covered  with  a  white 
sheet.  He should offer a survãl, offer a dagli, tie a rich orange reto of 
golden threads around His head, tie a rich reto around His waist, and 
place  a  rich reto over  His  shoulders.    Then,  he  should  place  various 
types  of  jewellery  made  of  diamonds,  pearls,  gold,  and rubies  on 
various  parts  of  His  body,  and  also  a  pearl  necklace.    After  offering 
these  clothes  and  jewellery,  the  various  parts  of Bhagvãn’s body 
should  be  closely  observed.    A kum-kum chãndlo should  also  be 
applied to Bhagvãn’s forehead. 
 
23.5 
“During the four months of monsoon, a person should perform pujã 
imagining  that Bhagvãn has  returned  from  some  village,  and  His 
white clothes have become completely drenched; or that He had gone 
to  bathe  with  the paramhans in  a  river  and  has  returned  from there 
completely  drenched.    After  removing  His  wet  clothes,  He  should  be 
offered  deep  orange  garments  to  wear,  and  His  forehead  should  be 
smeared with yellow sandalwood paste mixed with saffron. 
 
23.6 
“During summer, a person should visualise Bhagvãn to  be sitting 
either  in  an  open  place  or  in  a  flower  garden.    During  winter  and 
monsoon,  he  should  visualise Bhagvãn to  be  seated  in  a medi,  or 
inside  a  house.    In  particular,  when  offering Bhagvãn something  to 
eat,  only  those  foods – that  are  chewed,  drunk,  licked,  or  sucked – 
which  he  likes  to  eat  should  be  visualised  for  offering  to Bhagvãn.  
Even  if Bhagvãn does  not  like  these  foods,  when  offering  items  to 
Him,  a  person  should  still  visualise  only  those  items  that  he  enjoys 
himself.    Also,  incense,  oil  lamps,  flowers,  and ãrti should  be  offered 
to Bhagvãn as appropriate. 
 
23.7 
“In this way, a bhakta who offers pujã in different ways according to 
the  three  different  seasons  increases  his  love  for Bhagvãn, and  his 
jeev benefits  tremendously.    Therefore,  whoever  has  heard  this  talk 
should  remember  it  and daily  perform  the mãnsi pujã of Bhagvãn in 
the way described.  As a matter of fact, I have never talked about this 
before.” 

GADHADÃ III 
- 736 - 
23.8 
Shreeji   Mahãrãj   then   spoke   on   another   topic.    He  said,  “When 
Bhagvãn and His bhaktas are pleased on a bhakta, he should feel, ‘It is 
my great fortune that Bhagvãn and His bhaktas are pleased with me’.  
Also, when they lecture him, for the purpose of teaching a lesson, he 
should feel, ‘It is my great fortune that they lecture me; after all, it will 
help in removing my flaws’.    In  this  way,  a  person  should  be  pleased 
even  if  lectured;  he  should  not  feel  any  grief  in  his  mind,  nor  get 
upset, nor even regard himself as being very sinful.  He should always 
remain pleased.  This attitude should always be remembered.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 23 || 257 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 24 
Sixteen Spiritual Activities 
Vairãgya Due To Gnãn 
 
24.1 
In the Samvat year 1885, on Ãso vad 12 [4
th
 November 1828], Shreeji 
Mahãrãj   was   sitting   in   the mandir of Shree   Gopinãthji in   Dãdã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.    A sabhã of sãdhus,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various 
places, had gathered before Him. 
 
24.2 
Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked Shreeji Mahãrãj, “The bhaktas remain 
in Bhagvãn’s sevã in Akshardhãm.    What  are  the  spiritual  activities 
needed to earn such sevã?” 
 
24.3 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “An ekãntik bhakta easily  earns Bhagvãn’s 
sevã in Akshardhãm through  sixteen  spiritual  activities: shraddhã; 
svadharma; vairãgya;  total  control  over  the indriyas; ahinsã; brahm-
chãrya;  keeping  the  company  of sãdhus; ãtmã-nishthã;  unwavering 
bhakti to Bhagvãn coupled  with  the  knowledge  of  His  greatness; 
happiness;  honesty;  compassion;  penance;  treating  senior bhaktas 
with greater qualities as gurus and also maintaining deep respect for 
them; maintaining a feeling of friendship towards those bhaktas who 

GADHADÃ III 
- 737 - 
are  his equal;  and  treating  those bhaktas who  are  junior  to  him  as  a 
shishya and acting for their benefit.” 
 
24.4 
Shuk Muni then asked, “All of our sãdhus observe vartmãns.    But, 
what  characteristic  in  a sãdhu would  enable  us  to  be  sure  that  the 
sãdhu would   never deviate   from   his dharma even   in   times   of 
difficulty?” 
 
24.5 
Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “A sãdhu whose  attention  is  constantly 
focused  on  all  of  those ãgnãs given  by Bhagvãn, whether  they  are 
major  or  minor;  and  who  finds  it  extremely  difficult  to  disobey  any 
ãgnã;   and   who   acts   neither   excessively   nor   in   a   careless   way 
regarding  those ãgnãs, should  be  known  as a  person  who  would  not 
fall from his dharma despite difficult circumstances.” 
 
24.6 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then spoke out of compassion:  “It is very difficult for 
a  person  to  eradicate  his svabhãv.    Regardless  of  this,  if  he  has 
realised  that satsang fulfils  his  self-interest,  then  it  is  not  difficult  to 
do so.  For example, the members of Dãdã Khãchar’s family have an 
interest in keeping me here, so they do not retain any svabhãv that I 
do not like.  In this way, a person’s svabhãv can be eradicated due to 
self-interest.    It  can  also  be  eradicated  out  of  fear,  although  not 
totally.    This  is  because  a  person  may  fear  someone  in  his  presence, 
but  when  that  person  is  not  present,  he  may  no  longer  be  fearful – 
just as a thief abandons his corrupt nature due to fear of the king. 
 
24.7 
“Furthermore, despite the fact that I have repeatedly fired harsh 
words and upset a person who possesses some svabhãv or another, if 
he is not disheartened in any way at all, then I have such love for that 
person  that  the  love  remains  effortlessly  as  it  is,  in  the jãgrat state 
and svapna state.  Regardless of whatever happens, that love does not 
diminish. 
 
24.8 
“Moreover,  of  the  various gun possessed  by bhaktas,  I  shall  now 
narrate  one  admirable gun in  each bhakta.    Dãdã  Khãchar – gun of 
faith;  Rãj-Bãi – gun of tyãg;  Jeevu-Bã – gun of shraddhã,  Lãdu-Bã – 

GADHADÃ III 
- 738 - 
gun of  desiring  to  please  me;  Nityãnand  Swãmi – gun of  desiring  to 
please me; Brahmãnand Swãmi – gun of insisting that there should be 
no lapse at all in observing the niyams of satsang; Muktãnand Swãmi  
– gun of desiring to please me and having faith in me; Somlã Khãchar 
– gun of always behaving consistently; Chaitanyãnand Swãmi – gun of 
wishing  to  behave  in  such  a  way  that  pleases  Mahãrãj  in  any  way; 
Svayamprakãshãnand   Swãmi – gun of nishchay in Bhagvãn and 
realising His greatness; Jhinã-Bhãi Thãkor – gun of having awareness, 
for  fear  that  he  becomes attached  to  any  object  other  than Bhagvãn; 
and Motã Ãtmãnand Swãmi – gun of ensuring that none of my ãgnãs 
are disobeyed.”  In this way, Shreeji Mahãrãj narrated the gun of 
many senior paramhans and other bhaktas. 
 
24.9 
He then continued, “The three senior ladies of this place (Rãj-Bãi, 
Jeevu-Bã,   and   Lãdu-Bã),   and   Gopãlãnand   Swãmi,   Brahmãnand 
Swãmi,   Muktãnand   Swãmi,   Nityãnand   Swãmi,   Shuk   Muni,   Somlã 
Khãchar,  and  Dãdã  Khãchar – all  of  you  presently  behave  very  well.  
However,  if  the  four  factors  of desh, kãl, kriyã,  and sang were  to 
become   unpleasant,   then   there   is   no   doubt   at   all   that   your 
enthusiasm would not remain as it is now.  However, if a person who 
has a great degree of gnãn were to be caught in the vishays, he would 
break  free  from  that  attachment.    This gnãn is  the  understanding, ‘I, 
the jeev, am like this; the body is like this; the relations of the body are 
like this;  the  nature of  Prakruti,  Purush,  virãt,  sutrãtmã,  and  avyãkrut 
is  like  this;  Bhagvãn  is like this; and the dhãm of Bhagvãn is like this’, 
and  so  on.    If  a  person  has  firm  belief  of  this gnãn in  his  heart,  then 
the vairãgya that results is true vairãgya.  Apart from that, any other 
form  of vairãgya only  superficially  appears  to  be vairãgya;  in fact, 
there  is  no  strength  in  it.    For  example,  the  flame  of  an  oil  lamp  is 
extinguished  by  the  wind,  whereas  the vadvãnal fire  and  fire  of 
lightning   in   the   clouds   is   not   extinguished   by   water;   despite 
remaining  in  water  itself,  it  continues  to  burn.    In the  same  way, 
vairãgya without gnãn does  not  last  when  it  encounters  the vishays.  
On  the  other  hand, vairãgya produced  from gnãn does  not  diminish 

GADHADÃ III 
- 739 - 
despite   encountering   the vishays;   it   continues   to   burn   like   the 
vadvãnal fire. 
 
24.10 
“It is precisely for the  purpose  of  somehow  instilling  this gnãn in 
your minds that I continuously deliver talks.  If a talk eventually does 
truly inspire you, then this gnãn will become instilled in you.  On the 
other  hand,  if  a  person  does  not  understand  this  and  instead  has a 
sense of ‘I-ness’ and ‘my-ness’ by believing, ‘This is my varna, this is 
my mother, this is my father, these are my relatives’, then he should be 
known    to    be    an   extremely   ignorant    person    with    a    worldly 
perception.” 
 
24.11 
Having  said  this,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  again  spoke  out  of  compassion:  
“What is the reason behind a mumukshu attaining  noble qualities?  
Well,  a  person  develops  hatred  for  the  world  in  proportion  to  the 
attachment  he  has  for  listening  to  the  talks  and kathãs of Bhagvãn. 
Also,  vicious  natures, such  as kãm, krodh, lobh,  and moh,  are  also 
destroyed to that extent.  Conversely, if a person is lazy in listening to 
those  talks  and kathãs,  then  he  should  assume  that  he  will  not 
remember  noble shãstras.  In  fact,  out  of  the  nine  types  of bhakti 
mentioned   in   the shãstras,   the bhakti of   listening   to kathãs  is 
considered  to  be  the  best.    Therefore,  a  person  who  possesses  that 
form  of bhakti will  attain  all  the  various  forms  of bhakti up  to  the 
including profound, loving bhakti.”  Shreeji Mahãrãj delivered the talk 
in this way. 
 
24.12 
At  noon  on  that  same  day,  when  all  the paramhans were  seated  for 
their meals in a line on the veranda outside the north-facing rooms of 
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated 
bedstead that had been placed under the neem tree. 
 
24.13 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said  to  the paramhans, “A person should not 
understand   the   greatness   of   female bhaktas in   excess.      This   is 
because   under   the   excuse   of   realising   their   greatness,   he   may 
constantly  think  of  them,  leading  to  them  appearing  in  his  dreams.  
So,    if    a    person    does    understand    their    greatness,    he    should 

GADHADÃ III 
- 740 - 
understand  it  collectively,  by  thinking, ‘All of them are bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn’.      However,   he   should   not   attempt   to   understand   a 
particular bhakta as  being  greater  and  another bhakta being  lesser.  
If  he  attempts  to  understand  their  greatness  to  a  greater  or  lesser 
degree  than  this,  then  there  is  a  great  danger  in  that.    Similarly, 
female bhaktas should also understand the greatness of male bhaktas 
collectively.    If  they  do  not  realise  this,  then  it  is  also  a  great  danger 
for those females.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 24 || 258 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 25 
Raj-Bãi’s Question 
 
25.1 
In  the Samvat year  1885,  on Kãrtik sud 10  [16
th
 November  1828], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  west-facing  rooms  of  Dãdã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various 
places, had gathered before Him. 
 
25.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj spoke out of compassion:  “Bhakti, upãsanã, 
sevã, shraddhã,  firmness  in  observing dharma,  and  other  spiritual 
activities related to Bhagvãn should all be performed without having 
desires   for   any   rewards.      This   fact   is   mentioned   in   the   sacred 
shãstras,  and  it  is  true;  but,  a  person  should  certainly  have  the 
following  desire:   ‘May Bhagvãn become pleased with me through 
these activities’.    That  desire  should  be  kept.    On  the  other  hand,  if  a 
person  does  not  keep  such  a  desire  and  acts  without  any  specific 
purpose, then he should be known to possess tamo-gun.  Therefore, a 
person   should   develop   the qualities of bhakti, upãsanã, sevã, 
shraddhã, and dharma with the desire for rewards in the form of the 
happiness of Bhagvãn.  If a person has any desire other than that, he 
will attain only rewards such as the four types of mukti. 

GADHADÃ III 
- 741 - 
25.3 
“Furthermore, it is not the case that Bhagvãn’s happiness is bestowed 
only  on  those  who  offer bhakti with  various  items  and  not  upon  the 
poor.  Someone may be poor, but if he offers water, leaves, fruits, and 
flowers to Bhagvãn with shraddhã, that is enough to please Him.  This 
is  because Bhagvãn is  extremely  great.    Just  as  a  king  rewards 
someone  who  composes  even  a  verse  in  his  praise  with  a  village, 
similarly, Bhagvãn also becomes pleased instantly.” 
  
25.4 
Continuing, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Who can be called a true bhakta of 
Bhagvãn?  If some prolonged illness were to overtake a person’s 
body; or if he receives neither food to eat nor any clothes to wear; or 
regardless  of  the  extent  of  pain  or  pleasure  that  come  his  way,  if  he 
still  does  not  fall  back  even  slightly  from  the  worship  of bhakti of 
Bhagvãn, niyams, dharma,  or shraddhã,  but  progresses  with  time, 
then he is called a true bhakta.” 
 
25.5 
Then,  Rãj-Bãi had a question asked to Shreeji Mahãrãj, “Which gun 
pleases you, and which avgun displeases you?” 
 
25.6 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The following are the avgun of  speech:    If 
someone wishes to behave in some special way, then he should notify 
me only once by saying:  ‘Mahãrãj, if you agree, then I shall behave like 
this’.    I  do  not  like  it  when  a  person  repeatedly  asks, ‘Mahãrãj, why 
are you not telling me whether I should behave like this or behave like 
that?’  I  do  not  like  a  person  who,  despite  knowing  me  as  his ishta-
dev,  repeatedly  questions  my  words.    I  do  not  like  a  person  who 
interrupts  me  while  I  am  speaking  to  someone.    Regarding  the 
performance  of  religious  actions,  such  as  performing dhyãn upon 
Bhagvãn, observance  of dharma,  offering bhakti,  I  do  not  like  a 
person   who   throws   the   burden   of  such   actions   on Bhagvãn by 
thinking, ‘Only if Bhagvãn wishes are these possible’.  Also, I do not like 
a  person  who thinks, ‘I shall do this; and I shall do that’,  and  then 
relies only on his own strength and not on the strength of Bhagvãn.  I 
extremely  dislike  a  person  who  speaks  inconsistently  and  rudely.    I 
do  not  like  a  person  who  feels  a  sense  of  shame  or  laziness when  it 

GADHADÃ III 
- 742 - 
comes  to  talking  of Bhagvãn, listening  to kathãs, or  singing kirtans, 
and  yet  feels  no  shame  or  laziness  in  performing  worldly  activities.  
Also,  I  do  not  like  a  person  who  boasts  of  his tyãg or bhakti,  or  of 
anything  else.    I  do  not  like  a  person who  sits  behind  everyone  else 
during  a sabhã instead  of  sitting  as  suits  his  own  status.    Moreover, 
when  seniors  are  seated  in  a sabhã,  I  do  not  like  a  person  who 
forcibly  pushes  them  aside  to  take  his  own  place  at  the  front  of  the 
sabhã. 
 
25.7 
“In addition, I am pleased with female bhaktas who  behave  morally 
by   covering   their   own   bodies   and   who   keep   their   gaze   cast 
downwards  when  they  walk,  instead  of  keeping  a  wandering  gaze.  
Many times, instead of doing my darshan with a fixed gaze, someone 
may abandon that darshan and look repeatedly in the direction of an 
approaching  man  or  woman,  or  a  dog  walking  by,  or  cattle  walking 
by, or in the direction of some noise.  On such a person, I feel so much 
disgust that I feel, ‘What can I do?  If I had not become a sãdhu, I would 
beat  him  in  some  way!’  But,  that  is  not  possible  since  beating 
someone  is  extremely  inappropriate  for  a sãdhu.  I  also  do  not  like  a 
person  who  conceals  the  truth – who  does  not  reveal  the  disturbing 
thoughts that arise in his mind to an appropriate person.  Also, these 
three   things   are   extremely   harmful:    mãn, krodh,   and   being   so 
suppressed  by  others  that  what  is  in  the  mind  cannot  be  revealed.  
Also, if bhaktas become disrespectful because they view each other as 
equals  and  do  not maintain  respect  for  one  another,  that  is  also 
extremely inappropriate.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 25 || 259 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 26 
A Sant Who Is Worthy Of Sevã Equally To Bhagvãn 
 
26.1 
In  the Samvat year  1885,  on Kãrtik sud 11  [17
th
 November  1828], 
Swãmi Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in the mandir of Shree 

GADHADÃ III 
- 743 - 
Gopinãthji in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed 
entirely   in   white   clothes.      A sabhã of paramhans,   as   well   as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
26.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “What are the characteristics of a sant 
who   is   worthy   of sevã equally   to Bhagvãn?      Well,   such   a sant 
suppresses the actions of Mãyã’s gun (sattva-gun, rajo-gun, and tamo-
gun), such as the indriyas and the antah-karans; but, he himself does 
not  get  suppressed  by  their  actions.    In  addition  to  this,  he  only 
performs  activities  related  to Bhagvãn;  he  is  loyal  in  his  observance 
of  the panch-vartmãn;  and  believing  himself  to  be brahm-rup,  he 
worships Purushottam Bhagvãn.  Such a sant should not be thought of 
as a human being, nor should he be thought of as a dev, because such 
behaviour is  not  possible  for  either  humans  or devs.    In  reality,  even 
though  that sant appears  to  be  human,  he  is  still  worthy  of sevã 
equally  to Bhagvãn.  Therefore,  whoever  desires  to  attain kalyãn 
should  perform  the sevã of  such sant.    Also,  females  should  perform 
sevã of females possessing such qualities.” 
 
26.3 
Then, Ãtmãnand Swãmi asked Shreeji Mahãrãj, “Regardless of how 
ordinary a person may be, as long as he stays within the limits of the 
vartmãns of  this satsang,  he  will  not  become  bound  by  the panch-
vishays.    Please  narrate  the  characteristics  of  a  person  who  cannot 
become  bound  by  the panch-vishays,  even  though  he  may  happen  to 
leave satsang due to unpleasant circumstances.” 
 
26.4 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then  explained,  “If  a  person  has dharma 
predominant in his mind; and if he has the qualities of an ãstik where 
he firmly believes, ‘A person who performs moral and immoral karmas 
in this lok will undoubtedly receive the rewards  of those karmas in the 
lok beyond’; and if he has such firm beliefs, and is concerned about his 
own  reputation  by  thinking, ‘If I do something immoral, what will 
people think of me?’,  then  he  will  not  become  bound  by  any  object 
wherever  he  goes.    For  example,  those  like  Mayã-Rãm  Bhatt,  Mulji 

GADHADÃ III 
- 744 - 
Brahm-Chãri,  and Nishkulãnand  Swãmi  will  never falter  even if  they 
encounter women or wealth. 
 
26.5 
“However, a person who is like this may have the characteristics of 
false ãtmã-nishthã in  thinking, ‘I am the ãtmã; I am brahm; so, I am 
not affected by good or bad actions, and I am absolutely detached from 
everything’.      Also,   he   may   falsely   understand   the   greatness   of 
Bhagvãn,  and  he  may  talk  a  great  deal  about  that  greatness,  by 
saying, ‘The greatness of Bhagvãn is so intense!  So, what harm is there 
in deviating from dharma?’  In such a person, these two types of flaws 
could   become   major   obstacles   in   the   observance   of dharma.  
Therefore, it is better if he has genuine ãtmã-nishthã, if he thoroughly 
understands  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn, and  if  he  firmly  observes  the 
various types of dharma with understanding, and becomes nishkãmi, 
nirlobhi, nisvãdi, nisnehi,  and nirmãni in  order  to  please Bhagvãn.  
Such a person believes, ‘If I follow dharma, Bhagvãn will be extremely 
pleased  with  me;  and  if  I  deviate  from  dharma  in  any  way,  then 
Bhagvãn will be extremely displeased with me’.    If  he  has  this  firm 
belief, then that bhakta will never falter from dharma in any way.  On 
the other hand, if a person does not have this kind of understanding, 
then regardless of how much gnãn he may have, or how much bhakti 
he may offer,  he may still  deviate  from dharma or become  bound  by 
mãyik objects.  This is a fundamental truth.” 
 
26.6 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  again addressed  the sabhã out of compassion:  “I do 
not  like ahankãr.    That ahankãr may be of a person’s qualities of 
bhakti, tyãg,  or vairãgya; of a person’s attainment of the qualities of 
brahm; of a person’s understanding; or of a person’s observance of 
the panch-vartmãn.  I do not like these or any other forms of ahankãr.  
Also,  I  do  not  like dambh.    What  is dambh?    Well,  although  a  person 
may   not   have   much nishchay, bhakti,   or dharma,   to   outwardly 
pretend  to  possess  them  to  a  great  extent  in  order  to  look  good  in 
front of others is dambh.  I do not like that; and nor do I like a person 
who  eliminates  the  difference  between  himself  and Bhagvãn.    I  also 
do not like a person who behaves freely liberally – after taking a vow, 

GADHADÃ III 
- 745 - 
he  adheres  to  it  occasionally  and  relaxes from  it  occasionally.  In 
addition, I do not like a person who considers himself to be extremely 
insignificant after having extensively understood the intense glory of 
Bhagvãn, and  who  does  not  believe  his  true svarup to  be  the ãtmã, 
which is distinct from the body. 
 
26.7 
“Now, I shall describe the type of person I do like.  Such a person 
thoroughly  understands  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn.    He  understands 
his ãtmã – which  is vyatirek from  the  body – to  be brahm-rup.    He 
firmly  observes dharma and  also  engages  in  the bhakti of Bhagvãn.  
Despite having such qualities, if there is some bhakta in satsang who 
does  not  understand  anything,  but  has nishchay in Bhagvãn, then  he 
would   consider   that bhakta to   be   great,   and   himself   to   be 
insignificant  in  comparison  to  that bhakta.    When  speaking,  such  a 
person  never  reveals  even  the  slightest  pride  of  his  wisdom.    I  am 
extremely pleased with a person who behaves in this way.” 
 
26.8 
Having delivered this talk, Shreeji Mahãrãj returned to His residence.  
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 26 || 260 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 27 
All Bliss Is Found In The Murti Of Bhagvãn 
 
27.1 
In the Samvat year 1885, on Kãrtik sud Punam [21
st
 November 1828], 
Swãmi Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in the mandir of Shree 
Gopinãthji in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed 
entirely   in   white   clothes.      A sabhã of paramhans,   as   well   as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
27.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “The pleasures associated with shabda, 
sparsh, rup, ras, and gandh, are all found to exist together in one place 
– in  the  blissful  and divya murti of Purushottam Bhagvãn.    When  we 
have  the darshan of  that murti of Bhagvãn, we  can  enjoy  the  bliss  of 
that  beauty,  as  well as  the  bliss of  the  other four types  of vishays,  all 

GADHADÃ III 
- 746 - 
at  the  same  time.    However,  with  worldly vishays,  when  a  person 
indulges  in  one vishay,  he  receives  the  pleasure  of  only  that vishay, 
but not of the others.  Therefore, the pleasures of worldly vishays are 
found separately.  Moreover, those pleasures are useless, perishable, 
and  the  cause  of  extreme  misery.    However,  in Bhagvãn, a  person 
enjoys  the  bliss  of  all  the vishays at  the  same  time.    That  bliss  is 
extremely divya;   it   is   eternal   and   imperishable.      Therefore,   a 
mumukshu should develop vairãgya towards the worldly vishays and 
become totally attached to the divya and blissful murti of Bhagvãn.” 
 
27.3 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then continued, “If a bhakta has an intense desire to 
engage  in  the bhakti of Bhagvãn and  to  associate  with  His sant, then 
regardless  of  any svabhãv that  he  may  possess,  he  eradicates  it  and 
behaves  according  to  the sant’s wishes.    Even  if  that svabhãv is  such 
that  it  has  become  bound  to  the chaitanya,  a  person  who  has  an 
intense desire to do satsang will eradicate it.”  With that, He narrated 
His own story:  “Initially, my nature was like that of a tyãgi,  but 
because I had an intense desire for the darshan of Rãmãnand Swãmi, 
I  lived  according  to  Muktãnand  Swãmi’s  instructions,  and  not 
according to my personal preferences.” 
 
27.4 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “The details of the kind of determination 
a bhakta should and should not keep are as follows:  The first type of 
determination  is  observing  the  vows,  such  as nishkãmi and nirlobhi; 
the second type of determination is behaving with the feeling that he 
will be able to sleep only if his place is here and not if it is elsewhere.  
The second type and other innumerable forms of determination that 
are  the  result  of  insignificant svabhãvs should  not  be  considered  the 
same   as   the   first   type   of   determination.  The   determination   of 
observing vartmãns is  an  essential  as  a  person’s  own  life;  it  is 
extremely beneficial.  That type of determination should be kept with 
an  understanding  of  its  importance.    But,  if  the  second  type  of 
determination  is  formed,  which  is  due  to svabhãvs,  it  should  be 
thought  of  as  worthless;  and  if  a sant asks  a  person  to  abandon  it, 

GADHADÃ III 
- 747 - 
then    it    should    be    abandoned.        However,    the    first    type    of 
determination should not be abandoned. 
 
27.5 
“To  consider  these  two  forms  of  determination  as  equivalent  is 
foolishness.    For  example,  if  a  child  has  almonds  in  his  fist,  and  if 
someone   attempts   to   make   him   give   them   up,   he   will   not.  
Furthermore,  if  he  has  a  fist  full  of  rupees  or  a  fist full  of  gold  coins, 
and  if someone  attempts to  make  him  give  them up,  he  will  not  give 
them  up.    Therefore,  it  can  be  said  that  the  child  considers  the 
almonds,   and   rupees,   and   the   gold   coins   to   be   of   equal   value.  
Therefore, the child can be considered to be ignorant. 
 
27.6 
“If someone has almonds in his hand, and a thief comes and threatens 
him  by  saying, ‘Put them down, or I will cut off your head with this 
sword’,  then  a  person  who  is  wise  will  give  them away,  but  a  person 
who   is   foolish   will   not.      Similarly,   between   the   two   types   of 
determination, a person should realise which is significant and which 
is  insignificant.    If  someone  does  not  understand  this  and  considers 
both to be equivalent, then he should be known to have a svabhãv of 
stubbornness  and  arrogance.    If  such  a  person  does  observe  the 
vartmãns due  to  that  determination,  and  if  he  remains  in satsang in 
this way till the end, then it is all well and good; but a person cannot 
have complete faith in him.  This is because if he is offended by some 
remarks, or if his self-importance is not maintained, then he will not 
remain  as  he  is.    On  the  other  hand,  a  person  who  offers bhakti to 
Bhagvãn and  observes vartmãns  with  determination  is  called  a 
rãjarshi; and a person who offers bhakti to Bhagvãn while observing 
vartmãns with   the   intention   of   pleasing Bhagvãn is   called   a 
brahmarshi and a sãdhu.  There is a similar difference in the rewards 
of the two as well.” 
 
27.7 
Continuing, Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “The flaws of mãn, irshyã, and 
krodh are much more harmful than even kãm.  This is because a sant 
may  have  compassion  on  a  person  with kãm,  but  he  will  not  have 
compassion  on  person  with mãn.  In  addition, irshyã and krodh 

GADHADÃ III 
- 748 - 
evolve  from mãn.    Therefore, mãn is  a  major  flaw.    Furthermore,  a 
person does not fall from satsang due to kãm as he does due to mãn.  
For  example,  there  are  many grahastha  bhaktas in  our satsang,  and 
they  continue  to  remain  in satsang.    So,  I  always  have  an  intense 
dislike  for mãn, irshyã,  and krodh.    You  will  find  this  verified  in  my 
spoken  words  which have  been  written  down.    Also,  if  you  reflect 
upon them, then you will realise this to be true as well.  Therefore, a 
person should eradicate mãn by realising the greatness of Bhagvãn.” 
 
27.8 
Again, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “What is nishchay in Bhagvãn?    Well, 
consider  how  it  is  in  worldly  life.    Since  childhood,  a  person  has  the 
belief  of  his  parents, varna, and ãshram,  and  gender,  as  well  as  the 
belief that this is an animal, this is a man, this is water, this is fire, this 
is the earth, this is the wind, this is the sky, and so on.  All this is due 
to  the shãstras.    Even  if  a  person  has  not  heard  the shãstras, he  has 
been convinced by principles prevalent in society, which themselves 
were  derived  from  the shãstras.    Similarly,  the  characteristics  of  a 
sant,  who  is  free  of  vicious  natures  like kãm, lobh, mãn, svãd,  and 
moh,  are  also  described  in  the shãstras.    A sant who  possesses  these 
characteristics  has  direct  relationship  with Bhagvãn.    Therefore,  a 
person  should  develop nishchay in Bhagvãn based  on  His words.    In 
fact,  to  have  firm  faith  in  the  words  of  the sant is  itself nishchay in 
Bhagvãn.” 
 
27.9 
Then,  Nãth  Bhakta  of  Vadodarã  asked  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  a  question:  
“Do the relatives of a bhakta of Bhagvãn, who  has  firm nishchay in 
Bhagvãn, attain kalyãn due to their relationship with that bhakta?” 
 
27.10 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If the relatives or ancestors of a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn have  affection  for  him,  then  yes,  they  will  attain kalyãn; 
otherwise, they will not.  In fact, even if a person who is not related to 
that bhakta has  affection  for  him,  then  he  will  also  benefit.    This  is 
because  at  the  time  of  death,  a  person  may  remember  that bhakta 
whose vrutti is   constantly   fixed   on Bhagvãn.      Therefore,   by 
remembering that bhakta, he attains kalyãn.” 

GADHADÃ III 
- 749 - 
27.11 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “I talk about the nature of the ãtmã and 
about the nature of Bhagvãn.  However, by merely talking about them 
a  person  does  not  experience  their  bliss  as  it  really  is.    Their  true 
bliss can only be experienced in samãdhi, or after a person leaves his 
body;  but  it  cannot  be  experienced  by  merely  talking  about  it.    For 
example,  the  pleasure  of  looking  at  an  attractive  object  can  only  be 
enjoyed by the eyes.  If someone were to praise that pleasure with his 
mouth  by  saying, ‘I saw a very beautiful object’,  then  the  pleasure 
experienced by the mouth is not the same as that experienced by the 
eyes.    Similarly,  a  person  may  attempt  to  praise  with  words  the 
pleasure  of  sounds  heard  by  the  ears,  fragrances  smelt  by  the  nose, 
sensations  felt  by the  skin,  and  flavours  tasted  by  the  tongue,  by 
saying, ‘It was an extremely pleasant smell; it had a delicious taste; it 
felt very good; it sounded nice’.    However,  he  does  not  experience 
pleasure  through  words  as  he  experiences  pleasure  through  the 
indriyas.  
 
27.12
 Similarly, the bliss and the happiness of Bhagvãn that he experiences, 
as well as the bliss and the happiness of the ãtmã that he experiences 
through samãdhi or after leaving the body, cannot be experienced by 
merely  talking  about  them.    However,  if  a  person  performs shravan, 
manan, and nididhyãs on these two topics, then he attains sãkshãtkãr.  
Then,  after  attaining sãkshãtkãr,  he  enjoys  the  same  experience  and 
bliss as he does from these two in samãdhi.  Therefore, after listening 
to  talks  concerning  these  two,  a  person  should  perform manan and 
nididhyãs on those talks.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 27 || 261 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 28 
Falling From The Path Of Bhagvãn’s 
 
28.1 
In  the Samvat year  1885,  on Kãrtik vad 1  [22
nd
 November  1828], 
Swãmi Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in the mandir of Shree 
Gopinãthji in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed 

GADHADÃ III 
- 750 - 
entirely   in   white clothes.      A sabhã of paramhans,   as   well   as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
28.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “There are two ways in which a person 
falls from the bhakti of Bhagvãn.  One way is by listening to shushka-
vedãnti shãstras,  where  he  may consider  the svarup of Shree  Krishna 
Bhagvãn and  other svarups to  be  false,  just  as  he  considers  all  other 
svarups to  be  false.    Such  a shushka-vedãnti should  be  considered  to 
be  extremely  ignorant.    The  other  way  of  falling  is  by  believing, ‘If I 
worship  Bhagvãn,  then  I  will  enjoy  women,  food,  drink,  and  other 
pleasures  of  the  panch-vishays in Golok and Vaikunth’.    Then,  due  to 
the  desires  of  those  pleasures,  he  forgets  even Bhagvãn.    The  fool, 
with his distorted mind, believes, ‘If that enjoyment was not true, then 
Bhagvãn  would  not  associate  with  women  like  Rãdhã  and  Lakshmi,  in 
that dhãm.  So, that pleasure is also true’.    However,  he  does  not 
realise Bhagvãn to be absolutely satisfied and happy within His own 
ãtmã.  In actual fact, such activities of Bhagvãn are for the purpose of 
giving bliss to His own bhaktas.  Therefore, a person should engage in 
bhakti together with gnãn and vairãgya. 
 
28.3 
“A person who has understood the greatness of Bhagvãn realises that 
only Bhagvãn is  all-blissful,  whereas  the  pleasures  derived  from  the 
panch-vishays have  only  a  slight  fraction  of  the  bliss  of Bhagvãn.  
Therefore,  he  would  never  become  attached  to  any  object.    The 
Moksh-Dharma also mentions:  ‘Compared to the bliss of the dhãm of 
Bhagvãn,  the  pleasures  of  the  other loks are like Narak’.    This  is  the 
understanding that a bhakta of Bhagvãn should have.  If he does not 
have  this  understanding,  he  will  fall  away  from Bhagvãn in  the  two 
ways mentioned.” 
 
28.4 
Then, Surã Khãchar asked Shreeji Mahãrãj, “Even after forming firm 
nishchay in Bhagvãn and His sant as they truly are, what is the reason 
for someone to suffer a setback?” 
 
28.5 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “There was some deficiency in that person’s 
nishchay from the moment that he first established it.  What was that 

GADHADÃ III 
- 751 - 
deficiency?    Well,  if  someone  wishes  to  indulge  in  savoury  food  due 
to  a  desire  for  tasting  delicious  food,  and  if Bhagvãn or  His sant 
criticise it, then he will suffer a setback.  Or, if disturbing thoughts of 
kãm still  remain,  and  they  speak  against it;  or if lobh remains, and  if 
they have him criticise his lobh by telling him, ‘Give away your wealth, 
property, land, and farm to someone’, then he will be unable to follow 
this ãgnã.    As  a  result, he  suffers  a  setback.    Or,  if  a  person  has mãn 
and  a sant criticises  it and  insults  him,  then he suffers  a setback  due 
to that as well.  Therefore, a person suffers a setback due to the avgun 
that  still  remain  in  him,  even  though  he  has nishchay in Bhagvãn.  
However,  if  a  person  eradicates  his avgun at  the  beginning,  when  he 
establishes his nishchay, then he will not suffer a setback.  At present, 
if  those  who  possess  these avgun thoughtfully  keep antar-drashti, 
they will be able to realise, ‘I am weak in this aspect.  So, if I am asked 
to  follow  such  an  ãgnã  I  will  fall  back  from  satsang  and  become  a 
vimukh’.  In this way, they can understand themselves completely.” 
 
28.6 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  Brahmãnand  Swãmi,  Shuk  Muni,  and 
Surã Khãchar a question:  “What avgun do you possess which would 
cause you to suffer a setback?” 
 
28.7 
The three of them answered, “Mahãrãj, we have the avgun of mãn.  As 
a  result,  if  a sãdhu of  an  equal  status  to  us  insults  us,  we  become 
somewhat disturbed.” 
 
28.8 
Hearing  this,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  commented,  “A  person  may  have 
realised Bhagvãn with  the  knowledge of  His  greatness  as  mentioned 
in the shlok: 
 
dyupataya eva ten a yayur-antam anantatayã 
tvamapi yad-antarãnda-nichayã nanu sãvaranãhã 
Even the masters of the higher loks cannot understand your greatness, 
because it is endless.  Neither can you yourself understand your own greatness.  
In your each and every hair, countless brahmãnds and their barriers (jad 
prakruti) fly simultaneously at immense speed – like specks of dust flying in 
the air.  Even the Shrutis, ultimately perish in you, and fail to praise your glory. 

GADHADÃ III 
- 752 - 
 “If a person has realised Bhagvãn in  this  way,  then  how  can  he  keep 
mãn, irshyã, or krodh towards  a sãdhu of  such  a Bhagvãn?    If  he  still 
does,  then there  is  a  flaw  in  his  understanding.    For  example,  if  a 
person understands the authority of a governor – that he is the ruler 
of  the  whole  world  and  that  he  is  extremely  powerful – then  even  if 
one  of  his  pauper-like  servants  were  to  come,  even  a  great  king 
would  obey his  orders  and  act  according  to  what  he  is  told.    This  is 
because  the  king  has  understood, ‘He is the servant of the powerful 
governor’.  After all, a person’s mãn does  not  continue  in  front  of 
someone  who  is  more  powerful  than  himself.    Similarly,  if  a  person 
has  understood Bhagvãn to  be  the  master  of  all  divine  powers  and 
wealth, then how can he retain mãn before a sant?” 
 
28.9 
Brahmãnand Swãmi agreed, “Mahãrãj, what you are saying is correct.  
If a person has realised Bhagvãn and the knowledge of His greatness, 
then he will never develop mãn, irshyã, or krodh towards a sant.” 
 
28.10 
Shreeji Mahãrãj continued, “Uddhavji was so great and so intelligent.  
However,  because  he  had  understood  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn, he 
asked to be reborn as a vine so that he could be touched by the dust 
from  the  feet  of  the gopis who  were  greatly  attached  to Bhagvãn.  
Therefore, it is stated: 
 
ãsãm-ahe charana-renu-jushãm-aham syãm 
vrundãvane kimapi gulma-latausha-dheenãm 
yã dustyajam svajanam-ãrya-patham cha  
hitvã bhejur-mukunda-padaveem shruti-bhir-vimru-gyãm 
Those gopis – having abandoned the bond of their bodily relations and the 
path of dharma as prescribed for the nobles – attained the state of Bhagvãn, 
which even the Shrutis seek.  May I also become any of the shrubs, vines, or 
herbs in Vrundãvan that are touched by the dust of their feet. 
 
 “Even Brahmã has said, 
 
aho bhãgyam-aho bhãgyam nanda-gopa-vrajaukasãm 
yan-mitram paramã-nandam purnam brahma sanãtanam 
How fortunate is Nand, the cowherds, and the residents of Vraj – whose friend 
was the alokik, eternal, perfect, and blissful Bhagvãn. 

GADHADÃ III 
- 753 - 
8.11
 “As he had understood the greatness of Bhagvãn, even Brahmã spoke 
in this way.  Therefore, if a person realises the greatness of Bhagvãn 
and His sant in this way, mãn, irshyã, or krodh can no longer persist.  
Moreover,  he  would  behave  as  a dãs of dãs before  them;  and  no 
matter  however  much  they  insult  him,  he  would  never  think  of 
leaving  their  company  and  going  away.    Also,  he  would  never  feel in 
his mind, ‘How long should I tolerate this?  I will just stay at home and 
engage  in  worship  there’.      Therefore,   if   a   person   understands 
Bhagvãn’s greatness in such a way, mãn is eradicated.” 
 
28.12 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “If a bhakta of Bhagvãn were placed 
on  a shuli due  to  some karma of  his,  and  if  at  that  time  I  were 
standing  next  to  him,  the bhakta would  still  not  think, ‘It would be 
good if Bhagvãn would free me from the pain of this shuli’.  In this way, 
he  is  not  concerned  about  his  own  physical  comforts.    Instead,  he 
endures  the  difficulties  that  fall  upon  him.    As  a  result, Bhagvãn 
becomes  extremely  pleased  with  such  a bhakta who  is  free  of  all 
expectations.” 
 
28.13 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “I shall now describe who attains the bliss 
related  to Bhagvãn.    First,  consider  the  following  analogy:    Water  is 
the  very  life  of  a  fish.    As  long  as  it remains  in  water,  it  is  able  to 
move,  swim,  and  perform  all  its  activities;  but  the  moment  it  leaves 
the water, it loses its life and dies.  Similarly, if a person believes the 
panch-vishays to  be  his  lifeline  and  believes  them  to  be  a  source  of 
happiness, then when he is separated from them, he becomes almost 
like  a  dead  person.    Such  a  person  can  never  attain  the  bliss  of 
Bhagvãn.    In  fact,  only  a  person  who  does  not  believe  the panch-
vishays to  be  his  lifeline  experiences Bhagvãn’s bliss;  only  he  is  able 
to indulge in the bliss; and only he attains that bliss.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 28 || 262 || 
 

GADHADÃ III 
- 754 - 
Gadhadã III – 29 
A Tyãgi And Grahastha With Moderate Vairãgya 
 
29.1 
In  the Samvat year  1885,  on  the  night  of Posh sud 2  [7
th
 January 
1829],  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was sitting  on  a decorated bedstead  that had 
been  placed  on  the  platform  in  front  of  the medi in Dãdã Khãchar’s 
darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A 
sabhã of sãdhus,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had 
gathered before Him. 
 
29.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked Shuk Muni a question:  “Suppose there 
are  two satsangis.    Both  are  twenty  years  of  age,  and  both  possess 
nishchay, sneh, bhakti, vairãgya,  and dharma to  an  equal  extent.  
However, due to prãrabdha, one of them married, whereas the other 
did  not  find  anyone  and  so  remained  a sãnkhya-yogi.    He  also  had  a 
desire  to  marry,  but  he  could  not  find  someone.    Since  neither  of 
them  had intense vairãgya from  the  beginning,  both  have  an  intense 
desire  for  indulging  in  the vishays.    Then,  the  question  is  whose 
desire  will  be  calmed:  the grahastha or  the sãnkhya-yogi?    When 
replying,  keep  in  mind  that  the  Veds  state: ‘Only a person who has 
intense   vairãgya   should   become   a   tyãgi   from   the   brahm-chãrya 
ãshram;  whereas  a  person  whose  vairãgya  is  feeble  should  become  a 
grahastha  for  the  purpose  of  diminishing  his  intense  desire  to  indulge 
in  the  vishays.    Only  then should he  accept  the  vãnprasth  ãshram,  and 
then the sannyãs ashram’.  Therefore, answer carefully.” 
 
29.3 
Shuk Muni attempted to answer the question but was unable to do so 
satisfactorily. 
 
29.4 
Answering  the  question  Himself,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “The 
grahastha is good, and the other who is a sãnkhya-yogi is bad.  This is 
because  he  lacks  intense vairãgya.    As  a  result,  he  does  not  realise 
that the vishays are worthless and false.  Also, for the same reason, he 
has no firmness in his ãtmã-nishthã.  For this reason, if he happens to 
leave satsang and  encounter vishays,  he  will  become  attached  to 

GADHADÃ III 
- 755 - 
them.    However,  if  he  does  not  come  across vishays,  he  will  be 
compelled   to   come   back   into satsang.      On   the   other   hand,   the 
grahastha will  progress  even  if  he  has  the darshan of  a sãdhu once 
every six months.  Therefore, it is not appropriate for a person who is 
deficient  in vairãgya to  become  a tyãgi;  it  is  only  appropriate  for 
someone  who  has  intense vairãgya.    If  someone  who  is  deficient  in 
vairãgya does   become   a tyãgi,   then   his tyãg will   not   continue 
throughout his life.  After one year, two years, or after even ten years, 
difficulties will definitely arise in his tyãg.” 
 
29.5 
Then, Shuk Muni raised a doubt.  He questioned, “Mahãrãj, if the 
person  whose vairãgya is  weak  listens  to  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn 
from a sãdhu and thinks over it in his mind, then will he not develop 
intense vairãgya?      In   fact,   only   very   few   people,   due   to   their 
prãrabdha, have intense vairãgya from the beginning.  Generally, we 
see that a person develops vairãgya even though he did not possess it 
initially.  How should this be understood?” 
 
29.6 
Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “The answer to that is that a person can 
never  develop  intense vairãgya merely  by  thinking  by  himself, or  by 
any other means for that matter.  However, if a person develops love 
for  a  great sant who  possesses  the  four  qualities  of dharma, gnãn, 
vairãgya,   and bhakti,   then   all   the   actions   he   performs   (seeing, 
listening,  talking)  will  be  performed  according  to  the  wishes  of  that 
great sant; he will not do anything which is against the sant’s wish.  In 
his mind, he constantly fears behaving against the wishes of that sant, 
and  feels, ‘If I do not behave according to his wish, then he will not 
maintain love for me’.    That  is  why  such  a  person  will  constantly 
behave  according  to  the sant’s wishes.    Therefore,  if  someone  has 
developed such  attachment  for  a sant,  then  even  if  he  does  not  have 
vairãgya, his tyãg will remain till the end. 
 
29.7 
“In our satsang,  all  the  males,  females,  and paramhans,  are  attached 
to  me.    Also,  all  the  females  observe vartmãns to  the  same  extent  as 
the  three  senior  females  (Lãdu-Bã,  Jeevu-Bã,  and  Rãj-Bãi).    This  is 

GADHADÃ III 
- 756 - 
because  in  their  mind,  they  realise, ‘If we do not remain alert and 
observe  the  vartmãns,  the  love  which  Mahãrãj  has  for  us  will  not 
remain, and He will become unhappy’.  The paramhans also behave in 
the  same  way.    In  fact,  it  is  the  same  for  all  the  other satsangis, 
brahm-chãris and pãrshads.    All  the  male  and  female bhaktas living 
far and wide are also alert in observing the vartmãns; they too feel, ‘If 
we  do  not  behave  properly,  Mahãrãj  will  become  displeased.’  
Therefore,  all  of  them  strictly  observe dharma out  of  love  for  me, 
even though they may possess vairãgya to a greater or lesser degree. 
 
29.8 
“However, when I recently fell ill in Panchãlã, if something serious 
had  happened  to  me,  then  everyone’s  firmness  would  not  have 
remained  as  it  is  now.    At  such  a  time,  a  person  who  has  intense 
vairãgya can  remain  within dharma;  or  a  person  who  has  lovingly 
attached  his jeev to  a  person  who  has  intense vairãgya can  remain 
within dharma;  or  a  person  who  keeps  contact  with satsang and, 
realising Bhagvãn to  be antaryãmi,  behaves  according  to  the niyams 
that   have   been   prescribed   for   him,   can   remain   within dharma.  
Except  for  these,  others  cannot  remain  within dharma.    Therefore, 
what  I  have  just  explained  is  the  only  answer  to  the  question  I  had 
asked.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 29 || 263 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 30 
Constant Awareness Of Five Thoughts 
 
30.1 
In  the Samvat year  1885,  on Posh sud Punam [19
th
 January  1829], 
Swãmi Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in the mandir of Shree 
Gopinãthji in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed 
entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
30.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Two beliefs which I like, and by which 
my  mind  becomes  calm,  are  as  follows:    First,  I  like  a  person  who  is 

GADHADÃ III 
- 757 - 
firmly   convinced   that   there   is   a   mass   of   divine   light   which   is 
chaitanya,  and  that  the murti of Shree  Purushottam  Bhagvãn forever 
resides  at  the  centre  of  that  mass  of  light;  and  with  that  belief,  he 
worships and offers bhakti to that Bhagvãn.  On the other hand, I do 
not  like  a  person  who  believes  in  and  worships  only  the chaitanya 
divine  light;  nor  do  I  like  a  person  who  does  not  believe Bhagvãn to 
forever  possess  a svarup; nor  do  I  like  a  person  who  does  not 
worship Bhagvãn.  Secondly, I like a person who performs in tap, and 
yog,  has vairãgya and  hatred  towards  the panch-vishays,  in  order  to 
please Bhagvãn – without  any  form  of  pretence.    Seeing  such  a 
person,   my   mind   becomes   pleased,   and   I   feel, ‘He  should  be 
congratulated for behaving in that way’. 
 
30.3 
“In addition, I have constant awareness of these five thoughts:  First, I 
am certainly  going  to  die and  leave  this  body.    In  fact, I  firmly  feel, ‘I 
am going to die at this second, at this very moment’.   Such  awareness 
remains in times of happiness and distress, pleasure and displeasure, 
and  amidst  all  activities.   That  is  the  type  of vairãgya I  possess.   The 
second  thought  is  the  constant  awareness  that  even  though  death  is 
certain,  this  much  work  is  left,  which  I  would  like  to  complete.   The 
third is thought of whether or not desires for the panch-vishays have 
been  eradicated  from  my  mind.  I  feel, ‘If they have been eradicated, 
then why does activity regarding that vishay still occur?  What if maybe 
they  have  not  been  eradicated?’  In   this way,   I   am   constantly 
suspicious of the mind.  The fourth thought is the concern of whether 
or  not  Muktãnand  Swãmi  and  the  other  senior sãdhus and  senior 
bhaktas have eradicated their desires for the panch-vishays.  In fact, I 
am  constantly  aware  of  looking into everyone’s hearts to observe, 
‘This person’s worldly desires have been removed, but this person’s 
have not’.  Finally, the fifth thought is that if I become unhappy, then 
who  knows  where  I  would  run  away  to!    I  would  probably  leave  my 
body.    Therefore,  I  believe  I  should  not  become  unhappy.    This  is 
because  it  is  good  that  by  my association  all  these men, women, and 
paramhans happily  sit  to  engage  in  the bhakti of Bhagvãn.    Seeing 
them  engaged  in  such bhakti,  I  become  extremely  pleased  in  my 

GADHADÃ III 
- 758 - 
mind.  I feel, ‘Everyone must die someday, but to perform bhakti in this 
way is the only great benefit of living’.  I am constantly aware of this.” 
 
30.4 
In  this  way,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  described  His  own  behaviour  as  an 
example  for  the  benefit  of  His bhaktas,  while  in  actual  fact,  He 
Himself is the pratyaksha svarup of Shree Purushottam Nãrãyan. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 30 || 264 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 31 
The Murti On Earth And The Murti In Akshardhãm 
 
31.1 
In the Samvat year 1885, on the evening of Mahã sud 4 [7
th
 February 
1829],  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on  the 
veranda  outside  the  west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Gadhadã.  He had tied a white feto around His head and was wearing 
a  white khes.    He  had  also  covered  Himself  with  a  red-bordered, 
white,  English  cloth.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas 
from   various   places,   had   gathered   before   Him.      Some   of   the 
paramhans were  singing kirtans to  the  accompaniment  of  musical 
instruments.  
 
31.2 
After  the paramhans sang  the kirtan ‘Hari Mere Hãralaki Lakari...’, 
Shreeji Mahãrãj requested, “Please sing ‘Jamunã Ke Teer Thãdo...’.”  
The paramhans then  began  singing  that kirtan.    In  the  meantime, 
Shreeji Mahãrãj sat thinking. 
 
31.3 
Then, He interrupted, “Please stop singing, and  allow  me  to  talk  to 
you.  What I am about to reveal to you is not much, but it can be very 
beneficial for those who practice dhyãn.  In fact, I have never revealed 
this matter before.”  Then, closing His gentle eyes, He began thinking, 
and then said, “There  is  a  mass  of  divine  light  that  is  like  countless 
millions  of  moons,  suns,  and  flames  of  fire.    That  mass  of  light 
appears  to  be  like  an  ocean.    The svarup of Purushottam  Bhagvãn 
resides  within  that  luminous, brahm-rup dhãm of Bhagvãn, and  He 
Himself assumes an avatãr from that murti. 

GADHADÃ III 
- 759 - 
31.4 
“What  is  that Bhagvãn like?    Well,  He  is  greater  than  both  the 
perishable  and  the  imperishable;  He  is  the  cause  of  all  causes;  and 
countless millions of akshar-rup muktas worship His holy feet.  Out of 
compassion,   that   very   same Bhagvãn is pratyaksha and   present 
before  your  eyes  in  an  incarnated murti for  the  purpose  of  granting 
ultimate kalyãn of jeevs.      Therefore,   there   is   a   great   similarity 
between   the murti residing   in   the dhãm of Bhagvãn and   this 
pratyaksha murti of Shree Krishna. 
 
31.5 
“The vision of a person who performs dhyãn on  this  human murti of 
Shree  Krishna develops  extreme vairãgya for  all  charming  sights 
other  than Bhagvãn and  remains  engrossed  only  in  the  charm  of 
Bhagvãn.    Then,  he  does not  notice  even  the  slightest  difference 
between the pratyaksha murti of Bhagvãn and the murti in His dhãm.  
The appearance and age of that murti, and the appearance and age of 
this murti will  appear  similar.    In  addition,  the  height  and  build  of 
that murti will appear to be exactly the same as that of this murti; not 
even  the  slightest  difference  can  be  perceived  between  that murti 
and  this murti.    Also,  there  appears  to  be  a  total  oneness  between 
them.  In this way, there is not even the slightest difference between 
that murti and this murti.  In fact, both are one. 
 
31.6 
“When a person performs dhyãn on that pratyaksha murti outwardly, 
in front of the eyes, there is not the slightest difference between that 
murti and  this murti.    However,  if  he  looks  at  that  same murti 
inwardly, within his eyes, then that same murti does not appear to be 
the same as before.  In this case, it becomes the same size as the pupil 
of  the  eye.    Then,  when  he  performs dhyãn and  looks  inward  at  the 
point of his throat and below, he does not see that same murti as the 
two murtis he   saw   before.      He   sees   that   same murti as   being 
extremely    large,    extremely    tall,    extremely    fat,    and    extremely 
frightening.  For example, the shadow of a man formed by the sun at 
noon would be almost the same length as the man’s body.  But when 
that same sun sets, the shadow becomes very elongated – it does not 
remain the same length as the man’s body.    Similarly,  the murti of 

GADHADÃ III 
- 760 - 
Bhagvãn also becomes as large as mentioned previously.  Then, when 
the  person  sees  that murti within  the buddhi,  which  resides  in  the 
heart,  and  when  he  sees  that murti within  his  own jeev within  the 
buddhi, he sees the murti as being the size of a thumb.  It appears to 
have two arms or four arms, but he does not see it in the three ways 
that he saw before.  Then, while performing dhyãn, he sees the murti 
to be greater than his jeev and sees it in the midst of a mass of divine 
light  which  is  like  that  of  countless  millions  of  suns,  moons,  and 
flames of fire.  Also, he sees that murti to be just like the murti that he 
saw   before   his   eyes;   he   does   not   perceive   even   the   slightest 
difference between the two. 
 
31.7 
“Therefore, the same murti that is in Akshardhãm – which is gunãtit – 
is pratyaksha.    There  is  no  difference  between  the  two.    Just  as  the 
murti in  the dhãm is gunãtit,  the  human murti is  also gunãtit.    The 
difference  which  was  noticed  earlier  was  due  to  the gun of  the 
different  locations  within  the  body – in  the  eyes  there  is sattva-gun; 
in the throat there is rajo-gun; even the jeev, which resides within the 
buddhi, is full of gun.” 
 
31.8 
After   delivering  this  talk,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “Please  continue 
singing the kirtan which you were singing earlier.” 
 
31.9 
In  this  way,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  revealed  Himself  as Purushottam using 
the non-pratyaksha svarup of Bhagvãn as an example. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 31 || 266 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 32 
Committing Sins Under The Excuse Of Bhagvãn’s Greatness 
 
32.1 
In the Samvat year 1885, on Mahã sud 5 [8
th
 February 1829], Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on 
the veranda outside the west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr 
in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of 

GADHADÃ III 
- 761 - 
munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before  Him.    Some  of  the paramhans were  singing kirtans related  to 
the spring season. 
 
32.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked Muktãnand Swãmi and the other sãdhus, 
“Please explain the meaning of the shlok: 
 
 vishayã vinivartante nirãhãrasya dehinaha   
 The sense objects recede for a person who refrains from indulging in them.  
However, the longing for them does not subside.  The longing subsides when 
his vision reaches Bhagvãn’s. 
 
32.3 
The sãdhus then  explained  the shlok according  to  the  commentary 
written by Rãmãnuj Ãchãrya. 
 
32.4 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then added, “With reference to that shlok,  I  have 
formed the belief that a person who is in his youth should reduce his 
diet and should eat and behave moderately.  When a person’s diet is 
reduced,   physical   strength   also   diminishes.      Only   then   can   the 
indriyas be  overcome;  otherwise  they  cannot.    Having  done  that,  if  a 
person  enthusiastically  engages  his  mind  in  the  nine  types  of bhakti 
of Bhagvãn, and  himself  lovingly  engages  in bhakti,  then  he  will 
remain in satsang till the end.  But, if he does not behave in this way, 
he  will  surely  surrender  to  his indriyas and,  sooner  or  later,  he  will 
fall  from satsang.    Even  a  person  who  has  mastered samãdhi,  like 
Sheth Govardhan, is afraid of this; so what can be said for others? 
 
32.5 
”However, a person’s diet cannot be controlled by merely observing 
several upvãs consecutively.    This  only  leads  to  his  desires  and  diet 
increasing, because when he breaks an upvãs, he tends to eat twice as 
much.  However, if a person begins to reduce his diet gradually, it can 
be controlled.  For example, even though the clouds cause rain to fall 
in  tiny  drops,  water  still  collects  in  a  large  quantity.    Similarly,  a 
person should control his diet gradually.  As a result, his indriyas will 
also  be  controlled.    Then,  if  he  lovingly  engages  in bhakti,  he  will 
remain in satsang till the end.  This is a fact.” 

GADHADÃ III 
- 762 - 
32.6 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “How does a true bhakta of Bhagvãn 
understand Bhagvãn’s greatness?    Well,  he  believes, ‘Bhagvãn, who 
possesses a definite murti, forever resides in His luminous Akshardhãm.  
He  is  the  cause  and  controller  of  everything,  the  antaryãmi  within  all 
and  the  supreme  lord  of  countless  millions  of  brahmãnds.    Moreover, 
His   murti   is   divine,   blissful,   and   free   from the  gun  of  Mãyã’.  
Understanding  the pratyaksha Bhagvãn in  this  way,  he  believes  that 
with   the   exception   of Bhagvãn, all   other   worldly   objects   are 
absolutely worthless and perishable.  In addition, he has love only for 
Bhagvãn, and he engages in the nine types of bhakti.  He also believes, 
‘Kãl, Mãyã, Brahmã, Shiv, Surya, and Chandra, are powerful, yet even 
they act according to the niyams of that extremely great Bhagvãn’.  
Understanding  this,  he  always  behaves  within  the niyams of dharma 
established  by Bhagvãn in  order  to  please  Him;  he  never  disobeys 
those niyams. 
 
32.7 
“On the other hand, a person who has a corrupted mind believes, 
‘Such a great Bhagvãn is patit-pãvan  and  adham-udhãran.    So,  why 
worry  about  slightly  disobeying  the  niyam  of  dharma?    After  all, 
Bhagvãn is capable of granting kalyãn’.    In  this  way,  he  does  not 
hesitate  in  committing  sins  under  the  pretext  of  knowing Bhagvãn’s 
greatness.    Such  a  person  should  be  considered  wicked  and  sinful.  
Also,  even  though  he  may  superficially  appear  to be  a bhakta,  he 
should  not  be  considered  a bhakta,  and  a  person  should  not  remain 
in his company.  Only a person who has the understanding described 
previously   should   be   considered   to   be   a bhakta,   and   only   his 
company should be kept.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 32 || 266 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 33 
All Are Affected By Wealth And Women 
 
33.1 
In the Samvat year 1885, on Fãgan sud 11 [16
th
 March 1829], Swãmi 
Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   in   the mandir of Shree 

GADHADÃ III 
- 763 - 
Gopinãthji in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed 
entirely   in   white   clothes.      A sabhã of paramhans,   as   well   as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
33.2 
Then, addressing all the paramhans, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “In satsang, 
there  are  only  a  few bhaktas whose mind  would  not  be  affected  by 
wealth,  property,  women,  and  children,  and  who  would  not  develop 
faith  in  those  who  fulfil  the  desires  related  to  those  things.    In  fact, 
there cannot be many bhaktas who are like this.”  Saying this, Shreeji 
Mahãrãj continued, “This Muktãnand Swãmi and Gopãlãnand Swãmi 
are  like  that,  because  in  no  way  would  they  become  impressed  by 
anyone,  no  matter  how  great  he  may  be,  and  not  even  if  he  were  to 
perform miracles. 
 
33.3 
“What are the characteristics of a person who will not be influenced 
by  anyone?    Well,  such  a  person  believes, ‘I am the ãtmã, which is 
distinct  from  the  body;  I  am  luminous  and  eternal.    Moreover,  the 
pratyaksha  svarup  of  Bhagvãn  constantly  resides  within  my  own  self.  
Except  for  the  svarup  of  Bhagvãn,  all worldly  svarups  are  asatya  and 
full of countless flaws’.    A  person  who  has  such vairãgya and  who 
thoroughly  understands  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn will  never  have 
any   kind   of   doubts   in   his   mind.      But   having   said   that,   this 
understanding is very difficult to develop. 
 
33.4
 “Even though these two sãdhus are so great, if they were to receive a 
great amount of honour, or if heaps of rupees and gold coins were to 
be  placed  before  them,  or  if  they  were  to  come  across  attractive 
women,  then  even  though  they are tyãgis,  they  would  not  be  able  to 
maintain  their dharma.    In  fact,  if  they  do  encounter  those  objects, 
then  it  is  doubtful  whether  they  would  remain  equal  with  even  the 
lowest of our tyãgis.  This is because that is effect of the association of 
those  objects.  For  example,  see  how  religious  all  of  us  sitting  here 
are.    However,  if  we  were  to  drink  bottles  of  liquor,  we  would  not 
remain  so  composed.    Similarly,  the  association  of  those  objects 
certainly  has  an  effect  on  a  person.    Therefore,  a  person  can  only  be 

GADHADÃ III 
- 764 - 
saved  from  those  objects  if  he  does  not  associate  with  them.    He 
should be cautious from the beginning, in case he comes across them.  
Moreover, it is a well-known fact of the shãstras that only Bhagvãn is 
unaffected by their association.  That is why it has been stated:  
 
rushim nãrãyanam-rute... 
Of the progeny of Brahmã (Marichi), and their progeny (Kashyap), and their 
progeny (humans and devs) – whose mind in this world, besides that of 
Nãrãyan Rushi, can be distinguished as being unaffected by the mãyã and 
attractive charm of women? 
 
... ye-nye svataha parihrutãd-api bibhyati sma 
O Master of the indriyas (Bhagvãn)!  You are indeed the lord of the whole 
mobile and immobile world, because even though you indulge in the various 
sense objects created by the imbalance in the gun of Mãyã, you remain 
unaffected by them.  Apart from you, others still fear the association of the 
sense objects – even though they have renounced them. 
 
33.5 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Who can be called an ekãntik bhakta of 
Bhagvãn?    Well,  a  person  who  possesses  the  qualities  of svadharma, 
gnãn, vairãgya,  and  unparalleled bhakti towards Bhagvãn coupled 
with knowledge of his greatness, can be called an ekãntik bhakta. 
 
33.6 
“Furthermore, regarding the ultimate fate of an ekãntik  bhakta,  it  is 
said the he ‘enters’ Bhagvãn.  But what is meant by ‘entering’?  Well, 
that bhakta has  love  for  the divya murti of Bhagvãn,  who  dwells 
within  a  mass  of  divine  light.    Due  to  that  love,  he  has  constant 
awareness of  the murti of Bhagvãn in  his mind,  and  he  behaves as if 
he  is  infatuated  by  that murti.    Remaining  in  that  state,  he  also 
engages  in  the  service  of Bhagvãn outwardly.    For  example,  even 
though Lakshmiji remains  in  the  heart  of Bhagvãn symbolically  and 
through  her  profound  love,  she  also  outwardly  serves  him  in  the 
svarup of a female.  The ‘entering’ of an ekãntik bhakta into Bhagvãn 
should be understood in a similar way. 
 
33.7 
“Even at present, the attachment a bhakta has  for  the  ten  types  of 
bhakti as  well  as  the  attachment  he has  for svadharma, vairãgya, 

GADHADÃ III 
- 765 - 
ãtmã-nishthã,   keeping   the   company   of   a sant and   realising   the 
greatness  of Bhagvãn is  such  that  he  can  in  no  way  do  without  it.  
Even though opium is extremely bitter, a person who is addicted to it 
cannot live without it.  Or, if a person is addicted to alcohol, then even 
though  his  throat  burns  whenever  he  drinks  alcohol,  he  cannot  live 
without it.  Even if someone were to offer him many rupees he would 
not  accept  them,  because  his  addiction  is  dearer  to  him.    This  is 
because that addiction has become ingrained in his jeev.  Similarly, if 
a  person  was  addicted  to  the bhakti of Bhagvãn and  other  such 
activities,  then even  if  he remains  under  the influence  of  any  type of 
kusang,  he  would  not  be  able  to  live  without  engaging  in bhakti.  
Moreover,  his  mind  would  not  be  pleased  in  engaging  in  any  other 
activities.      Such   a bhakta of Bhagvãn,   whose jeev has   become 
engrossed  in Bhagvãn’s bhakti and  other  such  activities,  and  who  is 
extremely  eager  to  perform  only  those  activities,  can also  be  said  to 
have ‘entered’ Bhagvãn. 
 
33.8 
“So, what are the characteristics of such a bhakta of Bhagvãn?    Well, 
except  for  the sevã of Bhagvãn, if  he  does  not  wish  for  even  the  four 
types  of mukti,  how  can  he  desire  anything  else?    Such  a  person 
should  be  known  as  an ekãntik bhakta because  he  has  no  desire  for 
anything.  A person who is not like this sometimes enjoys engaging in 
the bhakti of Bhagvãn’s;  but  if  he  encounters  evil  company,  he  will 
forget bhakti and  begin  to  behave  immorally.    Such  a  person  should 
be  known  to  be  a  fake bhakta and  a  person  who  believes  himself  to 
be the body.  He is not a true bhakta and cannot be trusted.” 
 
33.9 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  continued,  “If  a bhakta of Bhagvãn is 
vulnerable  to  women,  wealth, svabhãvs,  and  the  belief  that  he  is  the 
body,  then  even  if he  is  engaged  in  the bhakti of Bhagvãn, his bhakti 
cannot  be  trusted;  he  will  surely  encounter  obstacles  in  it.    This  is 
because if at some time he happens to come across women or wealth, 
then  there  will  be  no  stability  in  his bhakti,  and  he  will  become 
engrossed in them.  Also, if a person believes himself to be the body, 
then when he suffers due to some illness, or if he is unable to obtain 

GADHADÃ III 
- 766 - 
food and clothing, or if a ãgnã to observe a difficult vartmãn is given, 
then  again,  his bhakti will  be  disturbed.    In  fact,  he  will  become 
frustrated  and  will  not  be  able  to  think;  he  will  begin  to  behave 
immorally.  Also, if he has a certain svabhãv, and if a sant lectures him 
instead  of  allowing  him  to  behave  according  to  his svabhãv,  and 
makes him behave opposite to it, then also he will become disturbed.  
Then,  if  he  cannot  remain  in  the  company  of  a sant,  how  will  he  be 
able to maintain bhakti?  Therefore, a person who wishes to develop 
firm bhakti should not be vulnerable in these four aspects.  If there is 
a    flaw    in    these    four,    it    should    be    slowly    eradicated    with 
understanding.    Only  then  can  a  person  perform  constant bhakti of 
Bhagvãn.  What I have just said is absolutely true; there is no doubt in 
it whatsoever.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 33 || 267 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 34 
Maintaining Desires Only For Bhagvãn’s 
Expressing Anger At Those Who Disobey The Niyams Of Dharma 
 
34.1 
In  the Samvat year  1885,  on Chaitra sud 3  [6
th
 April  1829],  Swãmi 
Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   in   the mandir of Shree 
Gopinãthji in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed 
entirely   in   white   clothes.      A sabhã of paramhans,   as   well   as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
34.2 
Then, Shuk Muni asked Shreeji Mahãrãj, “There appear to be two 
means by which desires for only Bhagvãn remain, and desires for any 
worldly  object  do  not  remain.    One  is  love  for Bhagvãn, and  other  is 
vairãgya coupled with gnãn.  These are the two means.  For a person 
who  does  not  practise  these  two  means  firmly,  but  who  does  have 
nishchay in Bhagvãn and the belief of Bhagvãn, is there a third means 
by  which  he  can  maintain  desires  only  for Bhagvãn and  not  for 
anything else?” 

GADHADÃ III 
- 767 - 
34.3 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said in reply, “That is a good question because 
it  is  true  that  only  by  those  two  means  do  desires  only  for Bhagvãn 
remain, and desires for any worldly object do not remain.  If a person 
does not practice those two means, then his desires for objects other 
than Bhagvãn will not be eradicated.  As a result, he remains unhappy 
in  life.    But,  since  he  has nishchay in Bhagvãn, he  will  be  granted 
kalyãn by Bhagvãn after death. 
 
34.4 
“However, just like those two means, there is also a third means for 
eradicating desires for objects other than Bhagvãn.  What is it?  Well, 
it  is  to  vigilantly  observe  the  prescribed niyams.    What  are  those 
niyams?  Some are svadharma niyams, that are related to the duties of 
a person’s varna and ashram.    Just  as  there  are niyams for  an ãtmã-
nivedi sãdhu and a brahm-chãri, similarly, even though a person is not 
an ãtmã-nivedi, he should still follow the niyams of not seeing women 
and not listening to talks about them.  In this way, he should strictly 
and attentively observe the niyams related to abandoning the panch-
vishays.    Also,  he  should  physically  serve Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas, 
and  he  should  listen  to kathãs related  to Bhagvãn.  In  this  way,  if  he 
observes niyams in  the  form  of  engaging  in  the  nine  types  of bhakti, 
then  his  mind  will  also  begin  to  think  about good  thoughts.    So,  if  a 
person behaves according to these two niyams, then as a result, even 
if  he  does  not  have vairãgya or  love  for Bhagvãn, they  will  develop; 
he  will  become  extremely  powerful;  impure  desires  for  objects  will 
be eradicated; and only desires for Bhagvãn will flourish day by day.” 
 
34.5 
Again, Shuk Muni asked, “Mahãrãj, it seems krodh arises  when  a 
person’s desire for a certain object or his sense of ‘my-ness’ for 
something is violated by someone.  When a desire, such as a craving, 
is  not  satisfied,  then  that  desire  results  in krodh.    So,  it  can  be  said 
that such a person has developed a svabhãv in which krodh can arise.  
Is it possible that krodh will not arise even in such situations?” 
 
34.6 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A great sant,  due  to Bhagvãn’s ãgnã or  by 
his  own  wish  after  understanding Bhagvãn’s greatness  according  to 

GADHADÃ III 
- 768 - 
the shãstras, may have made a firm decision to keep countless people 
within  the niyams of dharma,  and  to  lead  them  onto  the  path  of 
Bhagvãn.  This sant may express anger on a person who disobeys the 
niyam of dharma and  follows adharma.    If  the sant does  not  express 
anger  and  does  not  lecture  that  person  in  order  to  teach  him  to 
remain  within  the niyams of dharma,  then  that  person  will  continue 
to  disobey  those niyams and  will  not  progress.    Therefore,  anger 
expressed  for  this  reason  is  beneficial;  there  is  nothing  unsuitable 
about  it.    This  is  because  thousands  of  people  have  taken  refuge  of 
the  great sant who  has  chosen  to  take  this  path.    So,  how  can  they 
possibly not be slightly lectured? 
 
34.7 
“However, anger will not arise if a person avoids the very cause of 
that  anger.    Obviously,  anger  will  not  arise,  if  a  person  is  travelling 
alone in the jungle; but how can a great sant do that?  After all, he has 
understood  from  the shãstras the  great  rewards  involved  in  guiding 
countless people towards Bhagvãn by talks, in order that they attain 
kalyãn.      Similarly,   he   has   also   understood   the   importance   of 
observing Bhagvãn’s ãgnã.    Therefore,  even  though  he  may  express 
anger, he still does not abandon his decision to lead people to kalyãn. 
 
34.8
 A  person  who  has  developed  attachment  with  a  great sant,  has 
understood  that  his  personal  interest  of  attaining kalyãn can  be 
fulfilled  by  the sant.    Also,  he  believes, ‘I can only attain kalyãn 
through this sant’.  Then,  even  though  he  may  have  the svabhãv of 
krodh, he will never express that krodh on that great sant.  In fact, he 
will surely  abandon  his svabhãv.   So, krodh can  also  be eradicated in 
this way. 
 
34.9 
“On the other hand, a person who becomes angry on a sant over  the 
exchange  of  some  worthless  objects  has  simply  not  understood  the 
greatness of the sant, or the true path of a sant.  If he had understood 
it,  then  he  would  not  become  angry  over  such  worthless  objects.  
Even  if  such  a  person  is  intelligent  and  understanding,  if  he  does 
become  angry  on  a sant for  worthless  objects,  then  his  intellect 

GADHADÃ III 
- 769 - 
should be considered to be like that of a king’s minister – skilled only 
in worldly affairs.  He does not possess the intellect of sant.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 34 || 268 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 35 
Forcefully Altering Svabhãv 
Bhagvãn Is Insulted When His Bhakta Is Insulted 
 
35.1 
In  the Samvat year  1885,  on Chaitra sud 9  [12
th
 April  1829],  Swãmi 
Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   in   the mandir of Shree 
Gopinãthji in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed 
entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of sãdhus,  as  well  as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
35.2 
Then,  Shuk Muni  asked,  “Mahãrãj,  how  can  we  recognise  that  a 
person has such a firm refuge of Bhagvãn and His bhaktas that it will 
not  falter  in  any  way – regardless  of  the  extent  of  suffering  he  may 
have  to  face;  regardless of  any  physical  happiness  or  distress;  and 
regardless  of  whether  he  faces  honour  or  insult,  or  even  unpleasant 
circumstances?    Please  also  describe  what  type  of  thoughts  such  a 
person has in mind, as well as how he behaves physically?” 
 
35.3 
Then,  Shreeji Mahãrãj said in reply, “If a bhakta realises  that  only 
Bhagvãn is great, but he does not believe anything else to be greater 
than Bhagvãn; and if he also believes that everything except Bhagvãn 
is  worthless;  and  if  he  does  not  become  disturbed  or  annoyed  when 
Bhagvãn or His sant attempts to forcefully alter his svabhãv or when 
they  do  not  allow  him  to  behave  according  to  his svabhãv;  and  if  he 
can  abandon  his svabhãv,  no  matter  how  embedded  it  may  be,  and 
follow  the ãgnã of Bhagvãn and  His sant in  a simple way – then  that 
bhakta’s acceptance   of   the   refuge   of Bhagvãn will   not   falter, 
regardless of how difficult the circumstances may be.” 

GADHADÃ III 
- 770 - 
35.4 
Shuk Muni then queried, “Such a person must become disturbed, 
because when someone’s svabhãv is  forcefully  altered,  he  naturally 
becomes   disturbed.      So,   are   there   differences   in   the   types   of 
disturbances that are experienced or not?” 
 
35.5 
Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “If a person is disturbed when his nature 
is forcefully altered, and if he then finds avgun within himself rather 
than with Bhagvãn or His sant, then he is good.  However, instead of 
finding  faults  with  himself,  if  a  person  perceives avgun in Bhagvãn 
and  His sant,  then his  future is uncertain,  and  there  is  no stability in 
his refuge of Bhagvãn.” 
 
35.6 
Again,  Shuk  Muni  asked,  “If Bhagvãn or   His sant have   never 
attempted to twist a person’s nature, how can he realise in his own 
mind, ‘If they do attempt to do so at some time in the future, I will 
become disturbed’.    After  all,  how  can  a  person  be  sure  of  something 
that he has not experienced?” 
 
35.7 
Hearing this, Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “A person should think about 
the  thoughts  that  occur  in  his  mind.    For  example, ‘In the mind, 
besides the thoughts of Bhagvãn, there are also thoughts related to the 
panch-vishays.    Of  these,  for  which  objects  do  I  have  powerful  desires 
and for which do I have strong cravings?’  If  a  person  thinks  in  this 
way,  he  can  realise  himself  as  he  truly  is;  otherwise,  he  cannot.  
During  the  thinking  of  those  thoughts,  he  should  also  realise, ‘I have 
very  strong  desires  for  this  object,  and  I  am  striving  to  attain  it.  
However,  when  a  sant  attempts  to  have  me  abandon  it,  I  will  become 
disturbed’.    In  this  way,  he  becomes  clear  about  his  own  self.    If  his 
svabhãv is stubborn, and Bhagvãn or His sant do not attempt to alter 
it,  then  he  will  survive  in satsang.    However,  if  they  do  attempt  to 
alter  it,  then  he  will  definitely  fall.    Ultimately,  he  will  become 
extremely disturbed and will fall from satsang.” 
 
35.8 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “The shãstras claim that to insult a sant is 
the greatest of all sins.  What is the reason for this?  Well, it is because 
Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn Himself  resides  in  the  heart  of  that sant.  

GADHADÃ III 
- 771 - 
Therefore,  when  a  person  insults  a sant,  he  insults Bhagvãn as  well.  
After  all,  when  a  person  insults  a sant, Bhagvãn, who  resides  within 
his  heart,  is  hurt.    In  such  a  case,  the  sin  of  insulting Bhagvãn is  an 
even  greater  sin.    Therefore,  it  is  said  that  to  insult  the sant is  the 
greatest of all sins. 
 
35.9 
“Having said that though, Kans, Shishupãl, Putnã, and other demons 
insulted Bhagvãn, yet Bhagvãn still granted them kalyãn like that of a 
bhakta.    This  is  because  even  though  it  was  out  of  hatred,  those 
demons  did  think  about Bhagvãn.  So, Bhagvãn felt, ‘Those demons 
thought  of  me,  and  therefore  associated  with  me,  even  though  it  was 
out of hatred.  So, I should grant them kalyãn’.  These cases should be 
taken  as  examples  of Bhagvãn’s compassion.    A  person  should  also 
realise, ‘If Bhagvãn granted  them  kalyãn  even  though  they  sought  the 
refuge  of  Bhagvãn  through  hatred,  why  would  Bhagvãn  not  grant 
kalyãn  to  a  bhakta  who  seeks  His  refuge  by  offering  bhakti  and  who 
pleases Him by that bhakti?  Of course, He will’. 
 
35.10 
“The intention of those who  have  written  the shãstras is  to  inspire 
people  towards  the bhakti of Bhagvãn by  showing Bhagvãn’s great 
compassion;   their   intention   was   not   to   allow   people   to   behave 
against Bhagvãn’s wishes  like  the  demons.    Therefore,  a  person  who 
spites Bhagvãn by  keeping  hatred  towards  Him  and  who  behaves 
against  His  wishes  should  definitely  be  considered  to  be  a  demon – 
because that is the way of demons.  However, a person should behave 
only  in  a  way  that  will  please Bhagvãn;  he  should  engage  in bhakti 
and  please  Him  and  His bhaktas.    That  is  the  way  of  the bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn.” 
 
35.11 
Shuk Muni then asked further, “Mahãrãj, what are the characteristics 
of  a sant who  is  such  that  by  insulting  him, Bhagvãn residing  within 
his heart is also insulted, and by performing his sevã, Bhagvãn’s sevã 
is also performed?” 
 
35.12 
Shreeji   Mahãrãj   thought   for   a   while   and   then   answered   out   of 
compassion:  “First of all, the most important characteristic is that he 

GADHADÃ III 
- 772 - 
never  believes Bhagvãn to  be nirãkãr.    He  understands Bhagvãn to 
eternally sãkãr.    No  matter  how  many  of  the  Purãns,  Upanishads, 
Veds, or other shãstras he may hear – if ever he comes across the idea 
of Bhagvãn being nirãkãr, he thinks, ‘Either I have not understood the 
true  meaning  of  the  shãstras,  or  there  may  be  other  purpose  behind 
such words; but Bhagvãn is always sãkãr’.    If  he does  not understand 
Bhagvãn be sãkãr, then his upãsanã cannot be considered to be firm.  
Also, if Bhagvãn is nirãkãr, then He could not be called the all-doer – 
just  as ãkãsh cannot  be  called  the  doer;  and  nor  could  He  be  said  to 
reside  in  one  location.    Therefore, Bhagvãn is eternally sãkãr.    In 
addition,  He  is  the  creator,  sustainer,  and  destroyer  of  countless 
brahmãnds; He is forever present in His Akshardhãm; He is the lord of 
all; and He is pratyaksha here before your eyes.  The sant mentioned 
above always has this understanding; but this understanding of his is 
never shaken in any way or under any circumstances. 
 
35.13 
“Secondly,  he  engages  himself  in  the ekãntik bhakti of Bhagvãn.  
Moreover,  when  he  sees  someone  else  engaged  in kathãs,  singing 
kirtans,   and   chanting   the   holy   name   of Bhagvãn, he   becomes 
extremely pleased in his mind. 
 
35.14 
“Thirdly, when he stays amongst bhaktas,  he  does  not  allow  any  of 
his svabhãvs to interfere.  In fact, he will abandon his svabhãvs, but he 
will  not  leave  the  company  of  the bhaktas of Bhagvãn.  If  a sant 
happens  to  criticise  his svabhãvs,  he  does  not  have  hatred  towards 
the sant.  Instead, he finds faults with his own svabhãvs, but he never 
becomes  upset  or  even  thinks  of  departing  from  the  company  of  the 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn.  In  this  way,  he  remains  within  the  company  of 
bhaktas. 
 
35.15 
“Fourthly, when he comes across any precious item, such as an 
expensive  piece  of  clothing,  some  delicious  food,  or  clean  water, ‘It 
would be nice to give this to a bhakta of Bhagvãn’.    He  would  give 
away the items to him and be happy. 

GADHADÃ III 
- 773 - 
35.16 
“Fifth, the bhaktas in whose company he is staying do not feel, ‘He has 
beeen  staying  with  us  for so  many  years,  yet  we  have  not  been  able  to 
truly  understand  him;  and  who  knows  what  he  is  really  like?    It  is 
difficult to judge him’.  He  would  not  be  like  that.    Instead,  he  would 
be such that everyone would know him outwardly and inwardly, and 
they  would  feel, ‘He is definitely like this’.    He  would  be  of  such  an 
honest nature. 
 
35.17 
“Sixth, even if he is of a quiet nature, he would not like the company 
of kusangis;  and  if  he  does  happen  to  come  across  them,  he  would 
become angry.  In this way, he has a natural dislike for the company 
of those who are vimukhs.   
 
35.18 
“Therefore, it should be known that Bhagvãn Himself  resides  in  the 
heart of a sant who possesses these six qualities.  By insulting such a 
sant,  a  person  commits  a  sin  equivalent  to  insulting Bhagvãn;  and  if 
he  performs sevã of  such  a sant,  he  earns  rewards  equivalent  to 
performing sevã of Bhagvãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 35 || 269 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 36 
The Most Extraordinary Spiritual Activity For Kalyãn 
The Company Of A Shushka-Vedãnti 
 
36.1 
In  the Samvat year  1885,  on Vaishãkh sud 1  [4
th
 May  1829],  Swãmi 
Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj rode on horseback from Dãdã Khãchar’s 
darbãr in Gadhadã and arrived at Lakshmi-Vãdi.  He sat on a platform 
within  the  grounds.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A 
sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places  had 
gathered before Him. 
 
36.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked all the paramhans and bhaktas, “What is 
the  most  extraordinary  spiritual  activity  for  the kalyãn of  the jeev, 
which  will  surely  guarantee kalyãn and  prevent  all  other  obstacles 

GADHADÃ III 
- 774 - 
from  hindering  that kalyãn?    Also,  what  is  the  great  obstacle  in  that 
activity for kalyãn, on account of which a person would certainly fall 
from the path of kalyãn?  Please answer both of these questions.” 
 
36.3 
Everyone   answered   according   to   their   understanding,   but   the 
question was not answered satisfactorily. 
 
36.4 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said in reply, “The most extraordinary spiritual 
activity is to understand Purushottam Bhagvãn, who is seated amidst 
the    mass    of    light    of Brahm,    as    eternally    having    a svarup.  
Furthermore,  after  understanding  that  all avatãrs originate  from 
Him,  a  person  should  accept  the  refuge  of  the pratyaksha svarup of 
Bhagvãn by  any  means  possible.    He  should  also  offer bhakti to  that 
Bhagvãn while  observing dharma,  as  well  as  associate  with  a sant 
possessing  such bhakti.    That  is  the  most  extraordinary  spiritual 
activity for kalyãn.  A person encounters no obstacles along that path. 
 
36.5 
“A major obstacle in practising that spiritual activity is keeping the 
company  of shushka-vedãntis.    Which  obstacles  arise  when  a  person 
keeps their company?  Initially, he develops affection for them.  That 
affection develops  due  to  the  kindness  of  the vedãntis.    For  example, 
if a person has saved someone’s life by giving him some food during a 
famine,  then  that  person  would  naturally  develop  affection  for  him.  
In this way, a person develops affection for a person who has helped 
him.    Also,  those shushka-vedãntis would  point  out  advantages,  such 
as, ‘The ãtmã does not undergo births and deaths, and it is formless.  In 
fact,  regardless  of  the  number  of  sins  a  person  may  commit,  the  ãtmã 
remains immune to those flaws’.  Pointing  out  such  advantages,  they 
criticise the svarup of Bhagvãn.  That is a major obstacle since it leads 
to  the  rejection  of Bhagvãn’s svarup.    Therefore,  a  person  should 
never  keep  the  company  of shushka-vedãntis – they  are  absolutely 
ignorant.    In  fact,  there  is  no  greater  obstacle  on  the  path  of bhakti 
than this.” 
 
36.6 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj returned to Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr.  There, He 
sat  on  a  large  decorated  bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  east-

GADHADÃ III 
- 775 - 
facing rooms and said, “I have heard all the shãstras and have formed 
a principle.  I have also travelled throughout this land and seen many 
yogis.”  Shreeji Mahãrãj then narrated the stories of Gopãldãsji and 
other sãdhus.  He then continued by saying, “I believe that it is 
impossible  to  see  the ãtmã and brahm without  the upãsanã and 
dhyãn of Bhagvãn’s murti.    Only  through upãsanã can  the ãtmã and 
brahm be seen; without it, they cannot be seen.  In fact, wishing to see 
the ãtmã and brahm without upãsanã is  like  attempting  to  lick  the 
sky  with  the  tongue;  even  if  a  person  tries  for  a  hundred  years,  he 
will never be able to taste it as sour or salty.  Similarly, the ãtmã and 
brahm simply  cannot  be  seen  without  the upãsanã of  the murti of 
Bhagvãn – regardless   of   the   efforts   a   person   may   resort   to.  
Furthermore,  the  fact  that  the shãstras mention  the  possibility  of 
ãtmã-nishthã through nirbij Sãnkhya  and  Yog  is  irrelevant – I  have 
not  seen  anyone  do  so,  nor  is  the  claim  in  agreement  with  my 
experience.  Therefore, the claim is false.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 36 || 270 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 37 
The Happiness Of Bhagvãn Is Never Forgotten 
 
37.1 
In  the Samvat year  1885,  on Vaishãkh sud 3  [6
th
 May  1829],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  square  cushion  on  the 
veranda outside the north-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of 
paramhans, as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered 
before Him. 
 
37.2 
Then,  addressing  all  the sãdhus and bhaktas,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said, 
“Once a person has thoroughly attained the gnãn of Bhagvãn, then 
even if the factors of desh, kãl, kriyã, and sang become unpleasant for 
him,  his gnãn does  not  diminish  in  the  least.    For  example,  take  the 
analogy  of  a  great  king  or  a  millionaire.    If  he  happens  to  lose  his 

GADHADÃ III 
- 776 - 
status due to his prãrabdha and becomes poor, and because of that if 
he has only cheap food to eat, such as low-quality grains, or spinach, 
or moss, or berries, or boiled pipal fruit, then he would certainly eat 
it;  but  he  would  also  recall  the  expensive  foods  that  he  formerly 
obtained and ate.  In his mind he would think, ‘I used to eat all those 
delicious foods in the past, whereas now I eat such common food’.    In 
this  way, whenever  he  eats,  he  would  recall  this.    However,  if  a 
person has been eating such common food from the beginning, and if 
he  becomes  even  poorer,  then  he  continues  to  eat  the  same  type  of 
food as before.  So, what does he have to recall?  Nothing. 
 
37.3 
“So, once a person has thoroughly known the bliss of Bhagvãn and 
the bliss of worshipping Bhagvãn in his own mind, then even if he can 
no longer remain within satsang and has to leave, he will experience 
happiness     and     misery     according     to     his prãrabdha while 
remembering  that  bliss;  he  will  not  forget  it.    But,  what  is  there  to 
recall for someone who has not known that bliss of Bhagvãn and who 
has not experienced it?  Nothing.  Such a person is like an animal.” 
 
37.4 
Continuing, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Now,  I  shall  narrate  to  you  the 
gnãn of  the murti of Bhagvãn.  No dev,  human  or  anything  created 
from Prakruti,  possesses  a murti like Bhagvãn.  In  addition, Kãl 
devours  everything  except Bhagvãn; Kãl’s powers  are  incapable  of 
affecting Bhagvãn.  This is what Bhagvãn is like.  In fact, only Bhagvãn 
is like Bhagvãn; no one else can even compare to Him.  Also, a bhakta 
in  the dhãm of Bhagvãn who  has  attained  characteristics  similar  to 
Bhagvãn also   possesses   a svarup similar   to   that   of Bhagvãn.  
Nevertheless,    that bhakta is    still    a mukta,    and Bhagvãn is 
Purushottam.   Bhagvãn is  supreme  amongst  everyone  and  is  worthy 
to be worshipped by everyone.  He is also their master.  However, no 
one  can  understand  the  greatness  of  that Bhagvãn.  He  has  a divya 
murti, is nirgun, and is worthy of performing dhyãn upon.  In fact, that 
murti of Bhagvãn is  such  that  a  person  who  performs dhyãn upon 
Him becomes nirgun himself. 

GADHADÃ III 
- 777 - 
37.5 
“Moreover, while staying in one place, in His dhãm, Bhagvãn resides 
by  way  of  His anvay form  as  the antaryãmi and  the  giver  of  the 
deserved  rewards  of karmas to  all  the jeevs  in  countless brahmãnds.  
He  is  the  very  life  of  all jeevs;  and  without  Him,  those jeevs  are  not 
capable of doing anything or indulging in anything. 
 
37.6 
“In addition, that Bhagvãn is the master of all yogic powers.  Just as a 
person who has attained yogic powers can obtain any object with his 
own hands, even in Brahm-Lok, while sitting here, similarly, Bhagvãn 
performs all activities while staying in one place only using His yogic 
powers.    Also,  for  example,  the  fire  that  is  latent  within  wood  and 
stone  is  different  from  the  wood  and  stone  themselves.    Similarly, 
Bhagvãn dwells  within  all jeevs,  but  His svarup is  different  from  the 
svarup of the jeevs. 
 
37.7 
“That Bhagvãn Himself,  possessing  countless divya powers,  becomes 
like  a  human  for  the  purpose  of  granting kalyãn to  the jeevs.    If  a 
person develops the gnãn of that svarup of Bhagvãn in this way, then 
if he has offered bhakti to that Bhagvãn and has fully experienced the 
bliss of that gnãn and bhakti as it really is at least once in his jeev, he 
will  never  forget  it.    In  fact,  regardless  of  whatever  happiness  or 
distress comes his way, he does not forget the experience of that bliss 
of Bhagvãn’s svarup,  just  as the  king  in  a  state  of  poverty  does  not 
forget the happiness of his past. 
 
37.8 
“I tell you this because currently all of you are present in satsang; but, 
due   to   unpleasant   circumstances   or   unpleasant prãrabdha,   if   a 
person  no  longer  remains  in satsang,  then  if  he  has  understood  this 
fact, his jeev can still attain kalyãn.  Also, if a person has such a belief, 
he will never feel, ‘I will not attain kalyãn’.  After all, to continuously 
remain  in satsang is indeed  extremely  difficult.    In  fact,  to  physically 
behave  as  described  is  also  rare.    However,  if  a  person  someday 
happens  to  leave satsang,  then  even  if  he  cannot  physically  behave 

GADHADÃ III 
- 778 - 
like  this  at  that  time,  his jeev will  still  benefit  greatly  if  he  has 
understood this fact.  That is why I have delivered this talk.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 37 || 271 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 38 
Avoiding The Six Desires 
 
38.1 
In the Samvat year 1885, on Vaishãkh sud 14 [17
th
 May 1829], Swãmi 
Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   in   the mandir of Shree 
Gopinãthji in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed 
entirely   in   white   clothes.      A sabhã of paramhans,   as   well   as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
38.2 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “Having  thought  about  the  Sãnkhya 
shãstras as  well  as  other shãstras,  I  have  formed  the  belief  that  all 
svarups that are the result of the entities evolved from Mãyã are false.  
This  is  because  all  of  those svarups will  be  destroyed  by Kãl.    On  the 
other  hand,  the svarup of Bhagvãn in Akshardhãm and  the svarup of 
the muktas – the pãrshads of Bhagvãn – are  all satya, divya,  and 
extremely  luminous.    Also,  the svarup of  that Bhagvãn and  those 
muktas is   two-armed   like   that   of   a   human   being,   and   it   is 
sachidãnand.    That Bhagvãn, residing  in Akshardhãm,  is  served  by 
those muktas with  various  types  of divya items,  and  He  is  always 
present there to bestow supreme bliss upon the muktas. 
 
38.3 
“It is that same supreme Purushottam Bhagvãn who  takes  birth  on 
this  earth  out  of  compassion – for  the  purpose  of  granting kalyãn to 
the jeevs.    He  is  presently  visible  before  everyone;  He  is  your ishta-
dev;   and   He   accepts   your sevã.      In   fact,   there   is   absolutely   no 
difference  between  the pratyaksha  svarup of Purushottam Bhagvãn 
visible before you and the svarup of Bhagvãn residing in Akshardhãm; 
both are one.  Also, this pratyaksha svarup of Purushottam Bhagvãn is 
the controller of all, including Akshar.  He is the lord (sarvopari) of all 

GADHADÃ III 
- 779 - 
the ishvars and the cause of all the avatãrs (avatãri).  Moreover, He is 
worthy  of  being  worshipped  by  all  of  you.    The  many  previous 
avatãrs of  this Bhagvãn are  worthy  of  being  bowed  down  to  and 
worthy of respect.” 
 
38.4 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  explained,  “A  person  who  possesses  the 
following  six  characteristics  will  never  become  happy,  either  in  this 
life or even after death: greed for wealth and other things; desires to 
associate  with  women;  attachment  of  the  tongue  to  various  tastes; 
the  belief  that  a  person  is  the  body;  affection  for kusangis;  and 
attachment to relatives.  Therefore, a person who desires to be happy 
should  eradicate  these svabhãvs,  maintain nivrutti,  and  not  keep  the 
company of those equal himself.  A person should also attach his jeev 
to the bhaktas of Bhagvãn – the great sant – who does not identify his 
self with the body, who possesses vairãgya, and who feels that he has 
disobeyed a major ãgnã of Bhagvãn even if he has disobeyed a minor 
ãgnã.    A  person  should  act  according  to  his ãgnã by  thought,  word, 
and deed.  Also, he should certainly avoid the vishays, and in no way 
should  he  allow  them  to  come  near  by  abandoning  his niyams.    If  a 
person does begin to associate with the vishays, he will certainly fall.  
This should be accepted as a universal principle.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 38 || 272 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 39 
Vishalya-Karani Herbal Medicine 
There Is Only One Bhagvãn 
 
39.1 
In  the Samvat year  1886,  on Ashãdh vad 10  [25
th
 July  1829],  Shreeji 
Mahãrãj  was sitting  on  the  veranda  outside  the  east-facing  rooms  of 
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was dressed entirely in white 
clothes.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various 
places, had gathered before Him. 

GADHADÃ III 
- 780 - 
39.2 
Addressing  all  the paramhans and satsangis,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said, 
“What is Bhagvãn’s mãyã?    Well, mãyã is nothing but the sense of ‘I-
ness’ towards the body and ‘my-ness’ towards anything related to the 
body.  These should be eradicated.  Anyone who eradicates mãyã can 
be said to have gone beyond mãyã.  In fact, it is the principle of all the 
shãstras that a  person  should  eradicate mãyã and  develop  love  for 
Bhagvãn.  This  principle  must  be  understood – either  today  or  at 
some time in the future.  Great bhaktas, such as Hanumãn, Nãrad, and 
Prahlãd, have  also  asked from Bhagvãn, ‘Protect us from mãyã in the 
form of ‘I-ness’ and ‘my-ness’, and may we develop love for you.  May we 
also  have  the  company  of  a  sant  who  has  gone  beyond  mãyã  and  has 
love for you; and may we develop affection and a sense of ‘my-ness’ 
towards him as well’.    Therefore,  we  too should  do the  same  and ask 
for  the  same,  as  well  as  do shravan, manan,  and nididhyãs on  this 
principle.” 
 
39.3 
Then continuing, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “A bhakta of Bhagvãn requires 
the   strength   of   two   things:    ãtmã-nishthã and   the   greatness   of 
Bhagvãn.  What  is ãtmã-nishthã?    It  is  to  realise  the ãtmã as  being 
distinct  from  the  body.    If  while  staying  among  the sãdhus there 
happens to be a quarrel from some reason, or if the feelings of ‘I-ness’ 
and ‘my-ness’, or vicious natures such as mãn, krodh, svãd, lobh, kãm, 
matsar,  and irshyã,  prevail,  then  a  person  who  does  not  regard 
himself  as  the ãtmã perceives avgun in  the sãdhus.    This  would  be 
extremely  harmful  for  him.    That  is  why  a  person  should  realise  his 
true self as being the ãtmã, distinct from the body. 
 
39.4 
“That ãtmã is neither a brãhman, nor a kshatriya, nor a kanbi.  It is no 
one’s son and no one’s father.  It belongs to no varna.  It is radiant like 
the sun and fire; but it is also full of chaitanya.  The flames of fire and 
the  rays  of  the  sun  are jad because  they  do  not  move  when  touched 
by  a  finger.    However,  when  an  ant  is  touched  by  a  finger,  it  moves 
and turns back.  This implies that the ãtmã is full of consciousness.  It 
is said to be similar to the sun or to fire, but that is merely because its 
form is similar in radiance. 

GADHADÃ III 
- 781 - 
39.5 
“The ãtmã has  passed  through countless  life  forms.    In  fact, it is said 
that  a  person  has  drank  as  much  milk  from  his  mothers  as  there  is 
water in the ocean.  In those lives, the ãtmã has experienced death in 
countless ways, yet it has not perished.  It has remained as it is.  So, if 
it  did  not  perish  in  that state  of  ignorance  when  it  regarded  itself  as 
the  body,  how  shall  it  perish  now  that  we  have its gnãn?    Therefore, 
we should realise that ãtmã as our true self. 
 
39.6 
“Furthermore, how should the greatness of Bhagvãn be understood?  
Well, Bhagvãn is   the   lord   of   the   lords   of   countless brahmãnds.  
However,  the brahmãnds of  which  He  is  the  lord  are  insignificant 
compared to Him.  Therefore, it is said: 
 
dyupataya eva ten a yayur-antam anantatayã 
tvamapi yad-antarãnda-nichayã nanu sãvaranãhã 
Even the masters of the higher loks cannot understand your greatness, 
because it is endless.  Neither can you yourself understand your own greatness.  
In your each and every hair, countless brahmãnds and their barriers (jad 
prakruti) fly simultaneously at immense speed – like specks of dust flying in 
the air.  Even the Shrutis, ultimately perish in you, and fail to praise your glory. 
 
39.7 
“Within each brahmãnd there are Brahmã, Vishnu, and Shiv, as well as 
the pruthvi with  its  seven dvips,  seven  oceans,  Meru,  and  Lokã-Lok, 
and other mountains.  The brahmãnds also contain the fourteen loks, 
the  eight  barriers,  and  many  other  things.   Bhagvãn is  the  lord  of 
countless  such brahmãnds.    For  example,  person  can  realise  the 
reputation  of  an  emperor  of  the  world,  even  though  his  villages  can 
be counted.  But, the reputation of Bhagvãn is much greater because 
even those countless brahmãnds are insignificant to Him.  So then, of 
what   significance   can   the   beings   of   those brahmãnds be   before 
Bhagvãn’s?      They   are   of   no   significance   at   all;   they   are   utterly 
insignificant. 
 
39.8 
“Furthermore, in those brahmãnds,  what  are  the  pleasures  of  the 
panch-vishays that Bhagvãn has  given  to  the jeevs  like?    Well,  those 

GADHADÃ III 
- 782 - 
pleasures  seem  extremely  rare;  so  much  so,  that  many  have  given 
their heads for them.  However, the bliss of Bhagvãn’s own murti and 
of  His dhãm are  indeed  outstanding.    The  pleasures  of  the  worldly 
vishays are  dependent  on  other  factors  and  must  be  experienced 
distinctly.    In  comparison, Bhagvãn is  the  reservoir  of  all  forms  of 
bliss.    Moreover,  the  bliss  of Bhagvãn is  imperishable  and  extremely 
alokik.    For  this,  consider  the  following  analogy:    An  extremely 
wealthy  man  enjoys  a  great  variety  of  food  at home.    Then,  after 
finishing the meal, he throws a leftover piece of rotlo to a dog.  In this 
case, the leftover piece of rotlo can be considered utterly inferior, and 
the  various  delicious  foods  that  the  wealthy  man  enjoys  can  be 
considered to be full of pleasure.  In the same way, Bhagvãn has given 
the  countless jeevs  of  the brahmãnds the  pleasures  of  the panch-
vishays; but they are inferior like the piece of rotlo thrown to the dog, 
whereas the bliss of Bhagvãn Himself is far greater. 
 
39.9 
“Even so, Bhagvãn grants a great deal of happiness to the jeev during 
the  state  of sushupti.    During sushupti,  a  person  is  relieved  of  even 
severe pain, and instead, he experiences profound peace. 
 
39.10 
“Even the great bhaktas such  as Brahmã, Shiv, Lakshmiji, Rãdhãji, 
Nãrad, Shukji, the Sanakãdik, and the nine Yogeshvars apply the dust 
of Bhagvãn’s holy feet upon their heads.  They put aside all their self-
importance and constantly offer bhakti to Him. 
 
39.11 
“Moreover, just look at the diverse creation created by Bhagvãn!  
What  creativity  He  has  used!    Just  see,  a  human  is  born  of  a  human, 
and an animal from an animal; a tree from a tree, and an ant from an 
ant.    Also,  no  matter  how  intelligent  someone  may  be,  no  one  is 
capable of replacing a destroyed part of someone’s body exactly as it 
was  before.   Bhagvãn possesses  innumerable  such  skills.    Therefore, 
by realising the greatness of Bhagvãn and realising Him to be blissful, 
a  person  develops vairãgya for  all  things,  and  develops  love  for 
Bhagvãn alone. 

GADHADÃ III 
- 783 - 
39.12 
“If  a  person   attains   the gnãn of   his jeevãtmã and   the gnãn of 
Bhagvãn’s greatness   as   mentioned   earlier,   then   even   if   he   has 
somehow  become  attached  to  any  sort  of  pleasures  of  the panch-
vishays,  he  would  not  remain  bound  by  them,  but  would    break  that 
bondage  and withdraw  from  them.  Then,  how  can  a  person  who 
abandons   the   pleasures   of   the panch-vishays become   attached?  
Therefore,  having  listened  to  these  two  types  of gnãn,  a  person 
should  apply  them  within  his  mind  with  great  enthusiasm.    For 
example,  a  brave  and fierce  man  would  be  extremely  angered  if  an 
enemy killed his father.  If the enemy harassed him further by killing 
his  son  and  brother,  kidnapping  his  wife,  passing on  his mother  to  a 
Muslim, as well as stealing all his belongings, the man would become 
increasingly  angered  as  he  is  harassed  more  and  more.    At  all  times 
then – while awake as well as in his dreams – he would be obsessed 
by  only  this.    In  the  same  way,  only  when  a  person  is  constantly 
obsessed  by  these  two  topics  can  that gnãn be  realised.    Then,  that 
gnãn would  assist  him  against  any  sort  of  difficulty  that  may  occur.  
For  example,  when Hanumãnji brought  the vishalya-karani herbal 
medicine for Rãmchandraji and gave it to Him to drink, all the arrows 
from Rãmchandraji’s body  fell  out  by  themselves.    Similarly,  all  the 
‘arrows’ in the form of the desires of the indriyas to  indulge  in  the 
vishays are removed when these two points have been embedded in a 
person’s  mind.    The vruttis of   his indriyas withdraw   from   the 
pleasures of the vishays and become rooted only in Bhagvãn.  Only he 
is a satsangi, because only he who associates with his own satya ãtmã 
and satya Bhagvãn can be called a satsangi. 
 
39.13 
“If a religious person were to hear the talks of these two points, they 
would stir his heart and pervade every pore of his body.  Conversely, 
if  a  demonic  person  were  to  hear  them,  they  would  not  touch  his 
heart at all; instead, they would exit from his ears, just as khir would 
not remain in a dog’s stomach because the dog would vomit it out.  In 
actual  fact,  nothing  can  be  said  to  be  as  delicious  as khir,  yet  it  does 
not remain in a dog’s stomach, let alone pervade its body.  On the 
other hand, if a man were to eat khir, it would indeed pervade every 

GADHADÃ III 
- 784 - 
pore  of  his  body,  and  it  would  be  extremely  enjoyable.    Likewise, 
these  talks  do  not  enter  into  the  hearts  of  dog-like,  demonic  people; 
these  talks  enter  and  pervade  totally  only  in  the  hearts  of  religious 
people.” 
 
39.14 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then added, “Only Bhagvãn is  like Bhagvãn.  Many 
have  attained  qualities  similar  to  His  by  worshipping  Him,  yet  they 
certainly  do  not  become  like Bhagvãn.  If  they  did  become  like 
Bhagvãn, this would suggest the existence of several Bhagvãns.  As a 
result,  the  control  of  the  world  would  not  remain  organised.    One 
Bhagvãn would  say, ‘I will create the world’,  while  another Bhagvãn 
would  say, ‘I will destroy the world’.    One Bhagvãn would  say, ‘I will 
make it rain’,  while  another  would  say, ‘I will not’.    One Bhagvãn 
would  say, ‘I will instil human instincts in animals’,  while  another 
would  say, ‘I will instil animal instincts in humans’.    A  stable  state 
would  not  be  possible  in  this  situation.    But,  see  how  organised 
everything  functions  in  the  world!    There  is  not  even  the  slightest 
irregularity.  Therefore, the ruler of all activities and the lord of all is 
one Bhagvãn.  Not only that, it seems that no one can ever challenge 
Him.    Therefore, Bhagvãn is  definitely  one,  and  no  one  can  become 
like Him. 
 
39.15 
“All these facts that I have revealed may be simple, but they include 
everything.   However, only  the  wise can  grasp  their  essence,  but  not 
others.        Whoever    understands    these    facts    and    thoroughly 
strengthens them has accomplished everything; he has nothing more 
to  achieve.    Having  listened  to  these  talks  delivered  by  me,  a  person 
should  keep  the  company  of  those bhaktas of Bhagvãn who  have 
thoroughly   absorbed   them.      This   will   lead   to   the   day-by-day 
strengthening of those talks.” 
 
39.16 
In conclusion, Shreeji Mahãrãj revealed, “I deliver these talks to you 
not from any imagination of my mind, nor to display any sort of skill.  
I  have  experienced  all  that  I  have  spoken  about.    In  fact,  I  speak  in 

GADHADÃ III 
- 785 - 
accordance to what I practise.  Outwardly, I may have a great deal of 
contact with women, wealth, and the panch-vishays.  In fact, wherever 
I  go – Surat,  Amdãvãd,  Vadodarã,  Vadtãl – thousands  of  people 
gather;   they  obey   me,  honour   me,   and   welcome  me   with   great 
festivity;  and  I  stay  in  luxurious  places  and  receive  rich  clothes  and 
vehicles.    Despites  all  this,  whenever  I  look  towards  my ãtmã and 
towards  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn, it  all  seems  absolutely  worthless.  
I cannot become attached to any of it, and I become unaware of it all, 
just as a person is unaware of his past lives.  The reason I can behave 
in   such   way   is   that   I   have   thoroughly   realised   the   two   topics 
mentioned before.  In fact, whoever realises them would also behave 
accordingly  if  ever  he  were  somehow  put  in  similar  circumstances.  
Therefore, these two topics should be understood by all means.” 
 
39.17 
In  this  way,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj,  out  of  great  compassion,  addressed 
others  on  the  basis  of  His  own  behaviour.    However,  He  is Shree 
Purushottam Nãrãyan. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 39 || 273 || 
 
 
|| End of Shree Gadhadã Antya Prakaran || 
 

BHUGOL KHAGOL 
- 786 - 
|| SHREE SWÃMINÃRAYAN VIJAYTETRÃM || 
 
VACHANÃMRUT 
Bhugol Khagol 
 
Geography And Astronomy 
 
1 
From Bhãdarvã sud 1  to Bhãdarvã  sud 11, Samvat 1863  [11  to  21 
November 1806], Shreeji Mahãrãj sat under the harmo tree in Bhakti-
Bãg, in Gadhadã, and dictated a letter to Shuk Muni addressed to His 
bhaktas.    The  letter  included  a  description  of pruthvi,  the dvips and 
the khands; the time span of the yugs; and a narration of the various 
types  of  destruction  in  reference  to  the  rarity  of  attaining  a  human 
birth   in Bharat-Khand.      It   incorporated   the   message   of   being 
determined  to  attain kalyãn rather  than  engaging  too  deeply  in 
worldly  activities.    A  similar  letter  is  also  noted  in  the  Shree  Hari 
Leelãmrut. 
 
2 
“The Shreemad Bhãgvat and other sacred shãstras state  that  it  is 
extremely rare to receive a human birth in Bharat-Khand, and that it 
can  be  equalled  to  receiving  a chintãmani.    In  fact,  even Indra and 
other devs long  for  a  human  birth.    The vishays,  the  riches,  and 
luxuries,  as  well  as  the  lifespan  of  the devs greatly  exceed  that  of 
humans, yet they have no means of attaining moksh in their own loks.  
Only after receiving a human birth in Bharat-Khand can a jeev attain 
moksh.   In  no  other  place  and  with  no other  body  is kalyãn possible.  
For  this  reason,  attaining  a  human  birth  in Bharat-Khand is  better 
than being born in any of the other region of Mrutyu-Lok.  Therefore, 
there  is  no  place  in  the  fourteen loks that  can  compare  with Bharat-
Khand.   
 
3 
“Here are the names of those fourteen loks,  of  which  six  are  above 
Mrutyu-Lok:  Firstly, there is Bhuvar-Lok, where impure devs reside.  

BHUGOL KHAGOL 
- 787 - 
Second  is  Svarg-Lok,  where Indra and  other devs reside.    Third  is 
Mahar-Lok,  where  Aryam  and  other  ancestral devs reside.    Fourth  is 
Jan-Lok  and,  fifth  is  Tap-Lok.    Bhrugu  and  other rushis stay  in  these 
two loks.   Finally,  the  sixth  and  highest lok is  Satya-Lok,  where 
Brahmã resides.  These are the seven loks including Mrutyu-Lok. 
 
4 
“Below Mrutyulok there are a further seven loks.    In  Atal,  Vital,  and 
Sutal,  the  demons  reside.    Below  them  are  Talãtal,  Mahãtal,  and 
Rasãtal,   in   which   nocturnal   beings   reside.      Finally,   Pãtãl   is   the 
seventh lok,  where  serpents  reside.    These  seven loks are  below 
Mrutyu-Lok.  This makes fourteen loks in total, of which Mrutyu-Lok 
is the best. 
 
5 
“Mrutyu-Lok comprises of seven spherical dvips:   
 
“In the centre is Jambu-Dvip,  which  is  100,000 yojans in  size.    It  is 
surrounded  by  an  ocean  of  salt-water  that  is  also  100,000 yojans in 
size. 
 
“The second dvip is Plaksh-Dvip, which is 200,000 yojans in size.  It is 
surrounded  by  an  ocean  of ikshu (sugarcane  juice),  which  is  also 
200,000 yojans in size. 
 
“The third dvip is  Shãlmali-Dvip,  which  is  circular,  and  is  400,000 
yojans in size.  It is surrounded by an ocean of surã (alcohol), which is 
also 400,000 yojans in size.  
   
“The fourth dvip is Kush-Dvip,  which  is  also  circular,  and  is  800,000 
yojans wide.    It  is  surrounded  by  an  ocean  of ghrut (ghee),  which  is 
also 800,000 yojans in size.  
 
“The fifth dvip is Kraunch-Dvip, which is 1,600,000 yojans in size.  It is 
surrounded  by  an  ocean  of kshir (milk),  which  is  also  1,600,000 
yojans in size. 

BHUGOL KHAGOL 
- 788 - 
“The sixth dvip is  Shãk-Dvip,  which  is  3,200,000 yojans wide.    It  is 
surrounded  by  an  ocean  of dadhi-mandod (yoghurt),  which  is  also 
3,200,000 yojans in size. 
 
“Finally, the seventh dvip is  called  Pushkar-Dvip,  which  is  6,400,000 
yojans in  size.   It  is  surrounded  by  an  ocean  of  sweet sudhã (amrut), 
which is also 6,400,000 yojans in size.  
 
“These  are  the  seven dvips that  make  up  Mrutyu-Lok,  of  which 
Jambu-Dvip is the best. 
 
6 
“Jambu-Dvip itself  comprises  of  nine khands.    At  the  centre  is  the 
golden  Mount  Meru.    Surrounding  its  base  on  all  four  sides  is  the 
landmass called Ilãvart-Khand, where Sankarshan is worshipped, and 
Shivji is  the  main bhakta.    To  the  west  of  Meru  is  Ketumãl-Khand, 
which  is  also  called  Subhag.    There, Pradyumna is  worshipped,  and 
Lakshmiji is the main bhakta. 
 
“To the north of Meru, there are three khands:  Ramyak-Khand – 
where Matsya is  worshipped,  and  Sãvarni  Manu  is  the  main bhakta; 
north  of  that  is  Hiranyamay-Khand – where  Kurma is worshipped, 
and Aryamã is the main bhakta; and north of that still is Kuru-Khand- 
where Varãh is  worshipped,  and  Pruthvi  is  the  main bhakta.    This 
makes five khands. 
 
“To the east of Meru there is the khand called  Bhadrãshva-Khand – 
where Hayagriv is worshipped, and Bhadrashravã is the main bhakta.  
South  of Meru,  there  are a  further  three khands:    Harivarsh-Khand – 
where Nrusinh is worshipped, and Prahlãd is the main bhakta; south 
of   that   is   Kimpurush-Khand – where Rãm is   worshipped,   and 
Hanumãn is  the  main bhakta;  and  further  south  of  that  is Bharat-
Khand – where Nar-Nãrãyan is  worshipped,  and Nãradji is  the  main 
bhakta.   These are  the  nine khands of  Jambu-Dvip.    Of  these, Bharat-
Khand is  the  best  because  although  the  other  eight  have  a  greater 

BHUGOL KHAGOL 
- 789 - 
extent  of  worldly  pleasures  to  indulge  in,  a  person  cannot  attain 
kalyãn there – activities for kalyãn are only possible in Bharat-Khand.  
For this reason, there is no place in the fourteen loks equal to Bharat-
Khand. 
 
7 
“Within Bharat-Khand,  there  are  thirteen  regions  which  are anãrya 
(immoral).    They  are:    [1]  Bangãl,  [2]  Nepãl,  [3]  Bhut,  [4]  Kãmãkshi, 
[5]  Sindh,  [6]  Kãbul,  [7]  Lãhor,  [8]  Multãn,  [9]  Irãn,  [10]  Astambol, 
[11]  Arbastãn,  [12]  Svãl,  and  [13]  Pilpilãm.    These  thirteen  are 
impure.  It is very difficult for someone who has taken birth there to 
attain  the  association  of  a sadguru (the  granter  of moksh)  and  to 
understand the nature of moksh. 
 
8 
“Twelve-and-a-half   regions   in Bharat-Khand are   said   to   be ãrya 
(sacred).    These  are:    [1] Purva,  [2]  Vraj,  [3]  Mãlav,  [4]  Mãru,  [5] 
Panjãb,  [6]  Gujarãt,  [7]  Dakshin,  [8]  Malbãr,  [9]  Tilang,  [10]  Drãvid, 
[11]  Bãrmalãr,  [12]  Sorath,  and  half  of  Kutch.    These  twelve-and-a-
half  regions  are  superior.    There,  the sadguru –who  is  a  knower  of 
brahm – is always present.  Whoever receives a human birth in these 
regions is able to understand dharma, gnãn, vairãgya, and bhakti, and 
is  able  to  realise  the  path  to kalyãn.    How  does  he  come  to  realise 
this?    Well,  these  regions  are  called  the  best  because  of the  many 
avatãrs of Bhagvãn that  take  birth  there.    Therefore,  all  humans  of 
Bharat-Khand can attain kalyãn if they make an effort; if they do not 
make  an  effort,  they  will not  attain kalyãn.   Therefore, a  person  who 
is  wise  should  abandon  violence  and  other  such  vicious  natures, 
abandon evil influences, and seek the refuge of the sadguru, who is a 
knower of brahm, and perform his sevã. 
 
9 
“The sadguru, whose characteristics are noted in the sacred shãstras, 
is   someone   who   is   gifted   with   the   noble gun of dharma, gnãn, 
vairãgya, and bhakti.  After recognising that sadguru, a person should 
seek   his   refuge,   keep   his   body, indriyas, and antah-karans in 
accordance  with  his ãgnã,  and  engage  in  the  worship  of Bhagvãn.  

BHUGOL KHAGOL 
- 790 - 
This is the only means for attaining kalyãn.  Whoever has done this in 
the  past,  is  presently  doing  so,  or  will  do  so  in  the  future,  should  be 
regarded  as  a  person  who  has  best  made  use  of  his durlabh human 
body,  as  a  person  who has  true  understanding, and  as  a  person  who 
is  renowned.    Conversely,  a  person  who  does  not  understand  this, 
wastes  such  a durlabh human  birth  by  craving  the  insignificant 
pleasures   of   the   world,   and   by   having   faith   in   the   words   of   a 
hypocritical,  misleading guru – who  himself  is  prey  to  death.    Even 
though  this  person  may  be  called  understanding,  renowned,  wise 
among  the bhaktas,  and  highly  respected,  his  respect  and  fame  are 
merely like a dream.  Those who assume such fame and respect to be 
true  and  are  obsessed  by  them,  but  do  not  understand  the  path  to 
kalyãn,  are  called  fools  and  self-destroyers  by  a sant and  by  the 
sacred shãstras.    They  would  then  have  to  wait  a  great  deal  of  time 
before  receiving  another  human  birth  in  such  a  place  where kalyãn 
can be attained. 
 
10 
“The duration of this time is stated in the shãstras.  One lav of Brahmã 
is  equal  to  666  human  years  and  eight  months.    Sixty lav equal  one 
nimish,  which  is  equivalent  to  40,000  human  years.    Sixty nimish 
equals  one pal,  which  is  the  equivalent  of  2,400,000  human  years.  
Sixty pal equal one ghadi, which is 144,000,000 human years.  Thirty 
ghadi make    a    day    of Brahmã,    which    is    the    equivalent    of 
4,320,000,000 human years. 
 
11 
“The passing of four yugs is  called  a chokadi.   Satya-Yug lasts  for 
1,728,000  human  years; Tretã-Yug lasts  for  1,296,000  human  years; 
Dvãpar-Yug lasts  for  864,000  human  years;  and Kali-Yug lasts  for 
432,000  human  years.    This  means  one chokadi is  completed  in 
4,320,000  years;  and  the  one  thousand chokadi pass  in  one  day  of 
Brahmã.    In  one  day  of Brahmã,  fourteen Manus and  fourteen Indras 
reign and die.  Each Manu and Indra reign for 308,571,428 years, six 
months,  twenty-five  days,  forty  two ghadi,  fifty  one  pal,  twenty-five 
nimish, and forty two and 
12
/
14
 lav.  Fourteen such Manus and Indras 

BHUGOL KHAGOL 
- 791 - 
are  created  and  destroyed  during  one  day  of Brahmã.    Countless 
creatures  die  throughout  the  day  of Brahmã.    This  is  called nitya-
pralay. 
 
12 
“When one night of Brahmã passes  and  he  retires  to  sleep,  the  ten 
loks   between   Svarg-Lok,   Mrutyu-Lok,   and   Pãtãl   are   destroyed.  
Brahmã’s night is as long as his day.  Therefore, one of Brahmã’s night 
and day together lasts for 8,640,000,000 human years.  The lower ten 
loks of the brahmãnd are therefore destroyed daily.  At the end of the 
day, a new set of loks are created, which in turn will be destroyed as 
well.    This  is  called nimit-pralay,  which  is  the  duration  of Brahmã’s 
whole day. 
 
13
 “Thirty days of Brahmã make  one  month;  twelve  months  make  one 
year;  and  a  hundred  years  is  the  lifespan  of Brahmã.    When Brahmã 
dies,  the brahmãnd,  which  consist  of  the  fourteen loks,  is  destroyed.  
Then,  all  the  entities  that  have  evolved  out  of Prakruti are  absorbed 
back into Prakruti.  This is called prãkrut-pralay. 
 
14 
“The fourth type of destruction is ãtyantik-pralay.    This  is  when 
countless  millions  of brahmãnds are  destroyed.    At  that  time,  even 
Prakruti-Purush draws countless brahmãnds within itself, and is then 
eclipsed by the light of Akshar.  This is called ãtyantik-pralay. 
 
15 
“At the time of creation, everything evolves from Prakruti-Purush in 
the  exact  reverse  order  from  which  it  was  absorbed  during  the  time 
of   destruction.      I   have   therefore   described   the   four   types   of 
destruction.   
 
16 
“The  third type of  destruction, prãkrut-pralay,  is  the  end  of  the 
lifespan of Brahmã.  A jeev misuses its human body, which it receives 
after  350,000,000 prãkrut-pralays,  for  the  sake  of  worthless  worldly 
pleasures and by the refuge of a false guru.  As a result, it has to suffer 
the   torments   of Yam-Rãj and   the   agonies   of   the   pits   of Narak.  

BHUGOL KHAGOL 
- 792 - 
Moreover, it receives another human birth in a place where kalyãn is 
attainable only after passing through the sufferings of the cycle of 8.4 
million  life  forms  (after another  350,000,000 prãkrut-pralays).    This 
is the interval before a jeev receives a human birth again. 
 
17 
“Therefore, having understood this today, and having sought the 
refuge  of  a  sadguru,  who  is  the  granter  of kalyãn,  and  having  kept 
your  body, indriyas,  and antah-karans in  accordance  with  his  wish, 
make every effort for the benefit of your ãtmã and reach the dhãm of 
Bhagvãn.    If  you  do  not  realise  this  fact  today  and waste  this human 
body, which is instrumental in attaining moksh, you will have to wait 
for  the  aforementioned  time  before  you  receive  another  chance  like 
this.  Only after such suffering and only at the end of that interval will 
you  receive  another  opportunity  to  attain moksh, and  that  too  if  you 
make every effort for it.  If you do not, you will not attain moksh.  This 
is a fundamental principle.  The wise should think about this.  On the 
other  hand,  fools  will  never  understand  this  since  they  have  no 
respect for the Shrutis or Smrutis.” 
 
|| Bhugol Khagol || 
 
 
|| End of Bhugol Khagol || 
 
 
 
   
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
GLOSSARY

Glossary 
- 794 - 
A  
abhedhya Indivisible. 
abhimãn Ego.  Arrogance.  The feeling of ‘I am something’. 
abhishek The pujã performed  by  bathing Bhagvãn with  five  items:  
milk, yoghurt, ghee, honey, and sugar. 
ãchãrya 1) A person who establishes a religious philosophy. 
2) Head   of   a sampradãy,   who   protects dharma.    A 
spiritual  leader  and guru,  who  initiates  a satsangi into 
the sampradãy.    There   are   two ãchãryas in   the 
Swãminãrãyan   Sampradãy;   one   for   northern   India 
(Amdãvãd  Gãdi),  and  one  for  southern  India  (Vadtãl 
Gãdi).    They  are  decedents  of  Dharma-Dev  (the  father 
of Swãminãrãyan    Bhagvãn).  Sahajãnand    Swami 
adopted   Ayodhyãprasãdji   from   His   elder   brother 
Rãmpratãpji,    and    adopted    Raghuvirji    from    His 
younger  brother  Ichhãrãmji.    Both  sons  then  became 
the     first     two ãchãryas of     the     Swãminãrãyan 
Sampradãy.   The ãchãrya a satsangi follows  depends 
on  where  they  live: satsangis living  in  northern  India 
fall  under  the  Amdãvãd  region,  and satsangis living  in 
southern India fall under the Vadtãl region. 
achhedhya Unbreakable.  Cannot be cut or divided. 
achyut Indestructible.  Never dies. 
adham-udhãran Saviour  of  sinners.    Frees  sinners  from  the  cycle  of  birth 
and death, so they can attain kalyãn. 
adharma Unrighteousness.      Immorality.      Sin.      The   opposite   of 
dharma, which causes dharma to decline.  
adhibhut 1) Organs of the indriyas.  The sthul body of the jeev. 
2) Five mahã-bhuts.  The sthul body of Virãt-Purush. 
adhidev 1) Main dev of the indriyas of the jeev. 
2) Main dev of the indriyas of Virãt-Purush. 
adhyãtma 1) Indriyas of the jeev. 
2) Indriyas of Virãt-Purush. 
Advait Non-dual.    The  philosophy greatly  proposed  by  Shankar-

Glossary 
- 795 - 
Ãchãrya  that  states  that  the  ultimate  reality  is  only  one 
substance – nirgun brahm – and  that  all  else  is  merely  an 
illusion. 
ãgnã A command. 
agni Fire. 
Agni-Dev The dev of fire. 
ahankãr 1) Ego.  The sense of ‘I-ness’. 
2) One  of  the  four antah-karans,  with  the  functions  of 
giving rise to the sense of self and individual existence.  
It   is   a   product   of maha-tattva from   which   the 
remaining tattvas are   produced.      By   nature,   it   is 
passive, dense, and totally ignorant. 
ahinsã 1) Non-violence – mentally, verbally, and physically. 
2) One  of  the panch-vartmãn:    do  not  kill  other  living 
beings, and do not eat meat. 
Ãhir A   class   of   people   of   the vaishya varna traditionally 
engaged in commercial activities. 
aishvaryãrthi A  person  who  worships Bhagvãn with  the  intention  of 
earning powers to create the world.  He is the lowest type 
of bhakta.  [Ashlãli – 1] 
akartum The  non-doer.   Bhagvãn does  not  do  anything,  as  He  has 
delegated responsibilities to devs. 
ãkãsh Space.    One  of  the  five bhuts,  from  which  the  physical 
world  (Virãt-Purush)  is  formed.    It  provides  space  for  all 
jeevs, is the cause of the internal and external activities of 
their  bodies,  and  is  also  where  the prãns, indriyas,  and 
antah-karans reside.   Ãkãsh is  the  greatest  of  the  five 
bhuts,  as  it  supports  and  pervades  all  of  the  other  four 
bhuts, yet remains unaffected by them. 
Akshar 1) Imperishable.    In  his  personal  form, Akshar serves 
Bhagvãn in Akshardhãm,  and  takes  birth  on  earth  as 
His  ideal bhakta (sat-purush).    Both  forms  are  human 
in  appearance.    In  his  impersonal  form, Akshar is  the 
dhãm of Bhagvãn called Akshardhãm.      In   his   all-
pervading anvay form, Akshar is   called Chidãkãsh.  

Glossary 
- 796 - 
Also referred to as Akshar-Brahm or Brahm. 
2) Second-highest of the five eternal entities (jeev, ishvar, 
Mãyã, and Akshar, and Parbrahm). 
Akshar-Brahm See Akshar. 
Akshardhãm 1) The  highest dhãm of Bhagvãn.    The  divine dhãm of 
Purushottam   Bhagvãn   Swãminãrãyan,   where   He   is 
forever  seated  before  the  countless muktas who  have 
attained qualities similar to those of Akshar. 
2) The formless svarup form of Akshar. 
akshar-mukta 1) A jeev which  has  qualities  similar  to  those  of Akshar.  
Used  to  describe  the  spiritual  state  of akshar-muktas.  
The   highest   level   of   faith   or   spiritual   status   is   to 
become akshar-rup and worship Bhagvãn.  [Loyã – 12]. 
2) Is  also  sometimes  used  to  describe  things  that  have 
attained    qualities    similar    to Akshar through    his 
contact,  [Gadhadã  II – 13]  attained  ultimate kalyãn, 
and resides forever in Akshardhãm with a divya body. 
Akshar-Purush See Purush. 
akshar-rup 1) Like the form of Akshar. 
2) Possessing  qualities  similar  to  those  of Akshar.    Same 
as brahm-rup. 
akshi-vidyã Knowledge of the eyes.  A type of brahm-vidyã by which a 
person  sees  his ãtmã and  the murti of Bhagvãn through 
his eyes. [Loyã 15]. 
alok A region beyond this lok. 
alokik Divine.    Magnificent.    That  which  is  found  in Akshardhãm 
is described as alokik. 
Amãs New moon.  The last day of a lunar month; the 15th day of 
the dark half of an Indian calendar month. 
amrut Nectar.    A  magical  liquid  churned  from  the  ocean  by  the 
devs and   the   demons,   and   it   was   known   to   grant 
immortality  to  those  who  drink  it.  However,  this  means 
the ãtmã is  unable  to  break  free  from  the  cycle  of  births 
and deaths. 
Amrutdhãm See Akshardhãm. 

Glossary 
- 797 - 
analpakshi Bird of fire.  Large, legendary bird that never lands on the 
ground and it has the strength to carry seven elephants. 
ãnãnd Blissful.  Enjoyable. Happiness. 
Anant-Apãr See Akshardhãm. 
andaj Born  from  an  egg.    Life-forms  born  from  eggs  (birds, 
reptiles, and amphibians). 
angarkhu A long-sleeved, upper garment that is made of a thin cloth. 
It  reaches  down  to  the  knees,  and  is  tied  with  strings  on 
the left side of the chest. 
Aniruddha One  of the  four  forms  of Bhagvãn’s Vishvarup svarup.    His 
role  is  to  teach dharma,  and  to  cause  the  creation  of  the 
brahmãnd (Virãt-Purush).    During  the  state  of  creation, 
Virãt-Purush worships Aniruddha. 
ankush An  instrument  used  to  control  an  elephant.    A chihn on 
Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn’s right foot.  Performing dhyãn on 
this chihn enables  a bhakta to  control  his  mind,  and  to 
become strong in worshipping Bhagvãn. 
antah-karan Inner  ability.    The  complete  mind  which  is  made  up  of 
four parts: man (generating thoughts and desires); buddhi 
(consolidating thoughts, making decisions and 
resolutions,  forming  convictions,  or  discriminating);  chitt 
(repeatedly  contemplating  or  focusing);  and  the ahankãr 
(forming  a  sense  of being).  It  is  also  referred  to  as  a 
singular  as  all  four  are  parts  make  up  one antah-karan, 
but  usually  referred   to  as  being  four  different antah-
karans. 
antar-drashti To  look  inwards.    Meditate.    To  look  inwards  at  the jeev.  
To direct the internal or external vrutti towards the murti 
of Bhagvãn is itself antar-drashti. 
antaryãmi 1) Inner controller.   Power  of Bhagvãn to reside within a 
jeev and ishvar,  and  control  its  each  and  every  action.  
This  means  that Bhagvãn knows  its  deepest  thoughts 
and feelings. 
2) The knower of all thoughts of everyone, everywhere. 
antya End. Final. 

Glossary 
- 798 - 
anu  An   essential,   universal,   and   atom-like   unit   of   matter.  
Smallest building block of creation. 
anvay Not separate.  United.  Associated.  Connected.  When used 
for Bhagvãn,  it  implies  that  He  inherently  exists  within.  
[Gadhadã I – 7]. 
anyathã-kartum The  all-doer  and  non-doer.    Even  though Bhagvãn is  the 
cause of everything, He does not do anything Himself.  He 
has  delegated  responsibilities  to  the devs.    For  example, 
Kãl and is responsible for death. 
apsãrã A beautiful, heavenly dancer. 
archimãrg Road  of fire.    Is  traditionally  thought  of as  the  path  to  the 
sun,  but  it  is  also  the  path  to  the dhãm of Bhagvãn which 
is taken by the jeev after death. 
ardha-chandra Half moon.  A chihn on Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn’s left foot.  
The  moon  symbolises  peace.    A bhakta performing dhyãn 
on   this chihn overcomes   all   miseries   and   experiences 
inner  peace  and  profound  happiness.    Also,  just  as  the 
night-lotus  blossoms  due  to  the  light  of  the  moon,  the 
bhakta blossoms  with bhakti and shraddhã through  the 
light of Bhagvãn. 
ardhamãtrã Half a letter. 
ãrta A  person  who  is  distressed  from  having  fallen  from  the 
path  of  attaining siddh-dashã,  but  still  wishes  to  attain  it.  
One of the four types of bhaktas. 
arth One of the  four purushãrths, allowing for the fulfilment  of 
desires    for    material    objects,    in particular    wealth.  
[Amdãvãd 5]. 
arthãthi A  person  who  desires  material  objects,  such  as  material 
pleasures and powers.  One of the four types of bhaktas. 
ãrti A form of worship, in which lighted wicks, soaked in ghee, 
are  gently  waved  before  the murti of Bhagvãn,  and  is 
accompanied   by  a  song  that  praises  Him.    The  flame 
acquires  the  power  of Bhagvãn.   Bhaktas then  pass  their 
down-turned  hands  over  the  flame  and  then  raise  their 
palms  to  their  forehead – the  blessings  of Bhagvãn pass 

Glossary 
- 799 - 
from  the  flame  to  the bhakta.    The ãrti of  a dev or  great 
person can also be performed (but not at the same time as 
Bhagvãn’s ãrti). 
ãsan 1) Seat.  A sitting posture in yog. 
2) Third   step   of ashtãng-yog,   which   involves   physical 
exercises of postures to promote concentration. 
asat 1) False. 
2) Temporary, perishable, and changing.  Is bound by the 
past, present, and future. 
asat-purush A  false sant. An asat-purush person  believes  that  all  male 
and   female svarups in   this   world   have   been   created 
through Mãyã and   the Purush, Virãt,   and svarup of 
Bhagvãn,    implying    that    all    of    these svarups are 
manifestations  of Bhagvãn Himself.    He  also  believes  that 
if  his  mind  is  attracted  towards  a  higher  or  lower svarup 
of either a male or female, he should perform dhyãn upon 
that very svarup in order to attain instantaneous samãdhi. 
asatya False.  Imaginary.  Illusionary. 
ãshã To want.  Desire. 
Ashãdh First  month  of  the Ãshãdhi Samvat year,  normally falling 
between June and July. 
ashram 1) Stage of life.  There are four ãshrams in total, each with 
their   duties   and   responsibilities – brahm-chãrya, 
grahastha, vãnprasth, and sannyãs. 
2) Hermitage.  Place where tyãgis live. 
ãshrit Disciple.  Devotee.  Follower. 
ashtakon An  octagon.    A chihn on Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn’s right 
foot.    Performing dhyãn on  this chihn grants  a bhakta the 
fruits  of ashtãng-yog.    He  also  attains Akshardhãm,  which 
is beyond the eight barriers. 
ashtãng-yog The  practice  of  focusing  and  quieting  the  fluctuations  of 
the  mind  through  various  physical  and  mental  practices, 
and   ultimately   aiming   for   the yog,   the   union   with 
Bhagvãn.  The  eight  progressive  steps  of ashtãng-yog are: 
yam (restraint), niyam (observance), ãsan (seat    or 

Glossary 
- 800 - 
posture), prãnãyãm (controlling   the prãns), pratyãhãr 
(withdrawal), dhãrnã (concentration), dhyãn 
(meditation),  and samãdhi (trance).    The  first  four  steps 
are  physical  practices,  whereas  the  last  four  steps  are 
mental practices. 
Ãso Fourth month of the Ãshãdhi Samvat year, normally falling 
between September and October. 
ãsopãlav A tall evergreen tree, called Polyalthia longifolia, native to 
India.    Its leaves  are  used  in  rituals  and  on  religious 
occasions as decoration. 
ãstik 1) A  person  who  believes  in  the  existence  of Bhagvãn, 
and is religious.  Opposite of nãstik. 
2) Describes  people  or shãstras that  accept  the  authority 
and authenticity of the Veds. 
asur Demon.  Evil person. 
asuyã Similar to envy.  
ãtmã 1) The  pure jeev,  which  is  distinct  from  the  three  bodies 
and three mental states, and distinct from the indriyas, 
the antah-karans,  worldly  desires,  or  any  other  traces 
of Mãyã.    It  is  imperishable  and  eternal,  does  not 
undergo births or deaths, and it leaves a physical body 
after  that  body  dies  and  assumes  another  physical 
body.  Infinite in number. 
2) That which pervades, inspires, and controls. 
ãtmã-nishthã Knowledge of the jeev.  The belief that a person is an ãtmã, 
which is imperishable and eternal. 
ãtmã-nivedi A  person  who  offers ãtmã-nivedanam,  the  ninth  type  of 
bhakti.    A bhakta who  has  totally  surrendered jeev to 
Bhagvãn.  A  person  whose  every  action  is  an  offering  to 
Bhagvãn and  who  has Bhagvãn at  the  centre  of  his  every 
action. 
ãtyantik Ultimate.  Final. 
ãtyantik kalyãn See moksh. 
ãtyantik-pralay Final   destruction.      Destruction   of   all   of   the   countless 
millions  of brahmãnds,  when  even Prakruti-Purush draws 

Glossary 
- 801 - 
in  countless brahmãnds within  itself,  and  is  then  eclipsed 
by  the  light  of  Akshar.    In ãtyantik-pralay,  only Bhagvãn, 
Akshar,  and  the akshar-muktas remain. Also  called gnãn-
pralay. 
ãval Type of small shrub whose leaves have healing qualities. 
avasthã State. Condition. Used to describe the three mental states: 
jãgrat, svapna, and sushupti. 
avatãr Incarnation  of Bhagvãn.  He  incarnates  on  Earth  for  the 
welfare of society and for the kalyãn of the jeevs. Bhagvãn 
is    always    present    in Bharat-Khand through    these 
incarnations  or  His sãdhus.  He  assumes  various avatãrs 
according  to  whichever  task  needs  to  be  accomplished  in 
whichever   place,   and   each avatãr possesses   varying 
amounts of Bhagvãn’s power. 
 
Descriptions  of  many avatãrs are  listed  in  the shãstras; 
ten  are  regarded  as  major avatãrs,  with  a  greater  degree 
of the presence of Bhagvãn than others. 
 
The most common list of the twenty-four avatãrs stated in 
the  Purãns  are:  [1] Sanakãdik,  [2] Varãh,  [3] Matsya,  [4] 
Hayagriv, [5] Hans, [6] Yagna, [7] Kurma, [8] Dhanvantari, 
[9] Mohini, [10] Pruthu, [11] Nãrad, [12] Rushabh-Dev [13] 
Dattãtrey,  [14] Kapil-Dev,  [15] Nar-Nãrãyan,  [16] Hari, 
[17] Nrusinh, [18] Vãman, [19] Parshurãm, [20] Vyãs, [21] 
Rãm, [22] Krishna, [23] Buddh, and [24] Kalki. 
 
Of these, the ten major avatãrs of Bhagvãn are: [1] Matsya, 
[2] Kurma,   [3] Varãh, [4] Nrusinh,   [5] Vãman,   [6] 
Parshurãm,  [7] Rãm,  [8] Krishna,  [9] Buddh,  and  [10] 
Kalki. 
avatãri The  cause  of  all avatãrs.   Swãminãrãyan  Bhagvãn.    All 
avatãrs emerge from Him.  
avidyã Knowledge  and  understanding   of  all  that  has  evolved 
from Mãyã,  and  is mãyik.    False  understanding  of  the 
nature of reality.  Ignorance. 
avinãshi Eternal.  Everlasting.  Imperishable.  Indestructible. 
avyãkrut The fundamental body of the three bodies of Virãt-Purush 

Glossary 
- 802 - 
and  other ishvars.    Equivalent  to  the kãran body  of  the 
jeevs.  [Kãriyãni – 12]. 
  
B  
bãdhitãnu vrutti To recall something that has been falsified.  A mental state 
in which a person fears the possibility of becoming bound 
again to  objects that have already  been  mentally falsified, 
and no affection remains.  [Gadhadã III – 4]. 
Badrikãshram 1) An ãshram with   orchards   of   badri-trees – trees 
bearing  small,  slightly  sour  apple-like  fruits,  called 
badri-fruits in Sanskrit. 
2) The dhãm of Nar-Nãrãyan.    Considered  to  be  full  of 
orchards of badri-trees. 
3) The muktas that  reside  in  this dhãm are ãtmãs who 
have  been  freed  from  the  cycle  of  births  and  deaths, 
but   have   not   yet   attained Akshardhãm.      So,   they 
perform  continuous tap,  in  order  to  attain  ultimate 
moksh. 
bãhya-drashti To look outwards. To look at the world. 
bãjubandh Decorative     jewellery     tied     around     the     upper-arm. 
Swãminãrãyan  Bhagvãn often  wore bãjubandh made  of 
flowers. 
Baldevji  The  elder  brother of Shree  Krishna.  He is considered as a 
partial avatãr of Vishnu or an avatãr of Shesh, the serpent 
on   which Vishnu sleeps.    Baldevji was   the   symbol   of 
strength,   an   obedient   son,   and   an   ideal   brother   and 
husband.  Also called Balrãm. 
Bãl-Mukund The murti of Shree Krishna in His child svarup. 
berkhã Strings of flowers tied around the wrist. 
Bhãdarvã Third  month  of the Ãshãdhi Samvat year,  normally  falling 
between August and September. 
Bhagvad Geetã Song of Bhagvãn.  One of the most popular Hindu shãstras.  
It   comprises   of   a   dialogue   between Arjun and Shree 
Krishna,   at   the   beginning   of   the   battle   between   the 
feuding   cousins,   the   Pãndavs   and   the   Kauravs.      The 

Glossary 
- 803 - 
Bhagvad  Geetã  forms  a  portion  of the  epic  Mahãbhãrat  in 
which Shree Krishna enlightens  Arjun  on karma, bhakti 
and gnãn,  and  inspires  him  to  selflessly  fulfil  his  duty  of 
fighting  for dharma and  against adharma by  the  strength 
and will of Bhagvãn.  One of the eight shãstras accepted as 
trustworthy by Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn. 
Bhagvãn God.  Supreme being.  Lord of all.  Bhagvãn is unparalleled, 
omnipotent  and  the  all-doer,  omniscient,   omnipresent, 
the   ocean   of   all   forms   of   bliss,   does   not   have   any 
attributes of Mãyã, is divine, and is always taking birth on 
earth  for  His bhaktas.    Resides  within  the ãtmã.    Also 
called Parbrahm, Paramãtmã, Purushottam, Krishna 
Nãrãyan, and Swãminãrãyan. 
bhagvan-nishtãrthi A  person  who  has  a  constant  and  singular  determination 
for  the sevã of   the pratyaksha  svarup of Purushottam 
Bhagvãn.  He is the best bhakta of all.  [Ashlãli – 1] 
bhãgvat bhakta A bhakta who  follows bhãgvat  dharma,  which  consists  of 
dharma, gnãn, vairãgya,   and bhakti coupled   with   the 
knowledge of Bhagvãn's greatness. 
bhãgvat dharma 1) Dharma related   to Bhagvãn.      The dharma which 
avatãrs of Bhagvãn come to  establish, and the dharma 
which  was  adopted  by Nãrad,  the Sanakãdik,  Shukji, 
Dhruv, Prahlãd, Ambrish and other bhaktas.  This form 
of dharma is not different from bhakti itself. 
2) Collective term for dharma, gnãn, vairãgya, and bhakti 
coupled  with  the  knowledge  of Bhagvãn's greatness.  
This  will  lead  a  person  to  become  an ekãntik  bhakta 
who crosses Bhagvãn's Mãyã and attains His dhãm. 
3) Also called ekãntik dharma. 
bhãgvati dikshã Initiation into a sampradãy.   A person may receive a guru 
mantra. 
bhajan Worship. 
bhakta Devotee of Bhagvãn.  A follower of Bhagvãn. 
Bhakti The devi of bhakti. 
bhakti Devotion to Bhagvãn.  One of the four attributes of ekãntik 
dharma.  There are nine types of bhakti: 

Glossary 
- 804 - 
 shravanam – listening  to kathãs or kirtans related  to 
Bhagvãn. 
 kirtanam – singing or talking about Bhagvãn. 
 smaranam – remembering Bhagvãn. 
 pãd-sevanam – massaging Bhagvãn's holy feet. 
 archanam – performing Bhagvãn’s pujã (ãrti, thãl, 
smearing sandalwood paste,). 
 vandanam – bowing before Bhagvãn. 
 dãsyam – behaving as the servant of Bhagvãn. 
 sakhyam – behaving as the friend of Bhagvãn. 
 ãtma-nivedanam – unconditionally offering everything 
to Bhagvãn. 
 
Where  the  ten  types  of bhakti are  mentioned,  the  tenth 
type  is prem-lakshanã  bhakti – profound,  loving bhakti. 
[Gadhadã III – 33] 
bhang An intoxicating drink produced from cannabis leaves. 
Bharat-Khand Ancient  India,  considered  to  have  stretched  westward  to 
present-day  Turkey,  eastward  to  present-day  Burma,  and 
beyond  the  Himalayan  mountain  range  in  the  north.    Is 
considered  to  be  the  best  of  the  nine khands of  Jambu-
Dvip  because  those  who  attain  birth  in  this  region  can 
potentially  attain kalyãn due  to  the  constant  presence  of 
Bhagvãn's avatãr or Bhagvãn's sant. 
bhekh-dhãri Sãdhu.  Tyãgi. 
Bhumã -Purush The svarup of Bhagvãn that resides in Avyãkrut. 
bhut A  physical  element  from  which  the sthul body  of Virãt-
Purush (the  physical  world)  is  formed.    There  are  five 
bhuts in  total – pruthvi, jal, tej, vãyu and ãkãsh.  They  are 
collectively called the five bhuts or five mahã-bhuts. 
bokãni Cloth  tied  around  the  head,  with  one  end  crossing  from 
under the chin to cover the ears and cheeks.  Worn during 
cold weather. 
bordi A  tree  bearing  delicate  flowers  amid  small thorns  and 
small, slightly sour apple-like fruits called bors.  Found  to 
grow  naturally  in  unattended  fields  or  jungles  due  to  its 
resilient roots. 

Glossary 
- 805 - 
borsali Tiny,   delicate,   white,   and   extremely   fragrant   flowers 
called Mimusops  elengi.  The  most  exotic  of  all  the  flowers 
mentioned  in  the  Vachanãmrut.  The  flowers  grow  on  a 
tree,  facing  downwards.    After  the  flower  withers  and 
falls,  a  green  seed  pod  appears,  which  ripens  into  a  red 
berry. 
brahm 1) A jeev is  said  to  become brahm when  it  has  attained  a 
nirgun state, and all the qualities of Brahm. 
2) Believed  by shushka-vedãntis to  be  the nirgun and 
formless reality, where all else is merely an illusion. 
Brahm 1) The dhãm of Bhagvãn.    It  is  eternal,  complete  with  all 
gun,  luminous,  and  flawless.  Also  called Akshar,  or 
Akshar-Brahm, or Akshardhãm. 
2) Fourth  of  the  five  eternal  entities,  which  transcends 
everything except Purushottam (jeev, ishvar, Mãyã, and 
Brahm, and Parbrahm).   
Brahmã The dev responsible for the  creation of the brahmãnd and 
the  life-forms  within  it.  Part  of  the  trinity  of devs,  along 
with Vishnu (the   sustainer)   and Shiv (the   destroyer), 
responsible for the control of one brahmãnd.  
brahm-agni Bhagvãn.    When  a  person  performs  a sãttvik yagna by 
withdrawing  the  ten indriyas and  the  mind  (the  eleventh 
indriya)    from    whichever vishays they    have    become 
attached  to,  he  offers  them  into brahm-agni.    The ãtmã 
and Bhagvãn then become one. 
brãhman Priest.     A   religious  and  educated  scholar   traditionally 
assigned  duties  of  worship,  performing  rites  and  rituals, 
and  teaching.    The  highest  of  the  four varnas (castes)  of 
the ancient Indian social system. 
brahmãnd Individual  'universe'  comprising  of  a  system  of  fourteen 
loks.      There   are   countless   millions   of brahmãnds on 
various planes.  Each brahmãnd, created and sustained by 
a   Pradhãn-Purush   pair,   contains   a   trinity   of Brahmã, 
Vishnu, and Shiv as the controlling devs.  The fourteen loks 
of   each brahmãnd are:   Satya-Lok,   Tap-Lok,   Jan-Lok, 
Mahar-Lok,   Svarg-Lok,   Bhuvar-Lok,   Mrutyu-Lok,   Atal, 
Vital, Sutal, Talãtal, Mahãtal, Rasãtal, Pãtãl. 
brahmarshi A tyãgi or    a    person    engaged    in    strict tap,    with 

Glossary 
- 806 - 
characteristics like that of a rushi.  At a higher level than a 
rãjarshi. 
brahmãy Divine. 
brahm-chãri 1) A brãhman who  has  been  initiated  as  a tyãgi into  the 
Swãminãrãyan sampradãy.    Such brahm-chãris were 
given   special   priestly   authority,   such   as   personal 
sevaks to   the murtis within mandirs,   and   as   the 
performers of other religious ceremonies. 
2) A  person  who  observes brahm-chãrya;  leads  a  life  of 
celibacy. 
3) A person who is in the first stage of life, brahm-chãrya 
ãshram. 
brahm-chãrya 1) Celibacy.  For tyãgis, eight types of brahm-chãrya have 
been prescribed, which prevent them from associating 
with the opposite gender in the following ways: 
 shravanam - listening to or about 
 keertanam - talking to or about 
 keli - frolicking with 
 prekshanam - intentionally looking at 
 guhyabhãshanam - privately conversing with 
 sankalp - fantasising about 
 adhyavasãya - thinking of 
 kriyã - intercourse with 
 
2) For    a grahastha male, brahm-chãrya constitutes 
avoiding  all  women  except  his  wife,  abstaining  from 
sexual  relations  with  his  wife  on  days  of vrat,  and 
engaging  in  sexual  relations  with  her  only  during  the 
appropriate times.  [Gadhadã I – 34]. 
brahm-chãrya 
ãshram 
First  of  the  four  stages  of  life,  when  a  person  fulfils  his 
duty  as  a  student  and  celibate.    At  the  end  of brahm-
chãrya ashram,  a  person  either  gets  married  and  enters 
grahastha ãshram, or becomes a tyãgi and  enters sannyãs 
ãshram. 
brãhm-kalp Period   of   time   during   the   process   of   creation   when 
Bhagvãn gave  all  beings,  from Brahmã to  the  smallest 
blade  of  grass  their  bodies,  through  his  own  body  in  the 
form of Virãt-Purush. Length of brahm-kalp time of one of 
Brahmã's days (4.32 x 10
9
 human years). 

Glossary 
- 807 - 
Brahm-Mahol See Akshardhãm. 
Brahmpur See Akshardhãm. 
brahm-randhra Spiritual  opening  in  the  crown  of  the  head  (at  the  end  of 
the sushumnã nãdi)  through  which  the jeev leaves  the 
body  upon  death  or  during samãdhi,  and  reaches  higher 
loks. A shikhã is kept at the brahm-randhra. 
brahm-rup  1) Like the form of Brahm. 
2) Possessing  qualities  similar  to  those  of Brahm.    Same 
as akshar-rup. 
brahm-sattã 1) Formless svarup of Brahm. 
2) Also refers to the ãtmã, which is eternal. 
brahm-svarup Form  of brahm.  Possessing  qualities  similar  to  those  of 
Brahm.  Also called akshar-rup. 
brahm-vidyã Knowledge of brahm.  Knowledge that guides a person on 
the path to Bhagvãn. 
Bruhaspati The guru of the devs. 
Buddh An avatãr of Bhagvãn.    He  incarnated  in  the svarup of  an 
enlightened sãdhu.      He    was   born   a   prince    named 
Siddhãrth.      A brãhman had   predicted   that   Siddhãrth 
would  either  become  a  great  king  or  a  great tyãgi as  a 
result of seeing suffering and death.  Siddhãrth eventually 
left  home  and  became  a sãdhu.    He  attained  great  peace 
and knowledge, and became enlightened.  He then became 
known as Buddh.  He preached the philosophy of ahinsã to 
all  who  could  hear  Him.    He  taught  that  all  sorrow  comes 
from attachments and desires, so it's better to abandon all 
attachments in order to remain happy. 
buddhi 1) Intellect.  Intelligence. 
2) One  of  the four antah-karans,  with  the  functions  of 
consolidating thoughts, making decisions and 
resolutions,   forming   beliefs,   or   discriminating.      It 
possesses  the  knowledge  of  all  objects  and  is  also  the 
reason  for  the  specific  knowledge  which  all  of  the 
indriyas possess.    Its  inherent  features  are  doubts, 
belief, sleep and memory. 

Glossary 
- 808 - 
  
C  
chãdar A thick blanket. 
chãdar A  thin  blanket.    Was  used  by  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  during  the 
cooler months. 
chaitanya Consciousness.    The  substance  of  the ãtmã.    A  higher 
consciousness that is beyond the physical world, which is 
jad and mãyik.  It is indestructible. 
chaitanya prakruti  All   things   that   are chetan or   animate,   and   possess 
chaitanya or   consciousness.      Living   elements.    The 
element of life (chaitanya), by which this world is upheld. 
Chaitra Tenth month of the Ãshãdhi Samvat year, normally falling 
between March and April. 
chãkhadi Wooden,  strapless  sandals  worn  specifically  by tyãgis for 
simplicity and personal discipline. 
chakor An  Indian  bird.    The chakor becomes  hypnotised  by  the 
appearance   of   the   full   moon.      The   chakor   remains 
motionless  for  the  entire  night,  except  for  its  head  that 
slowly follows the moon across the sky, until it bends and 
finally rests backwards upon the ground. 
chakra 1) A  razor-bladed  disc.    One  of Bhagvãn’s weapons.    Also 
called sudarshan chakra.  
2) Wheel.      According   to   yogic   practices, chakras are 
centres  of  spiritual  power  and  consciousness  located 
within  the  inner  body.    The  six chakras are:  ãgnã, 
vishuddh,  anãhat,  manipur,  svãdhisthãn,  ãdhãr.    Each 
chakra has its corresponding location and dev. 
chakshu Eyes.  Physical organ of sight (one of the indriyas). 
chameli A    flower    of    the    jasmine    genus    called Jasminum 
grandiflorum or  Spanish  jasmine.    It  has  a  white  colour 
and extremely sweet fragrance.  Usually found to blossom 
during the month of Shrãvan.  The chameli plant is a vine, 
whereas mogrã and dolariyã (also  part  of  the  jasmine 
genus) are shrubs. 

Glossary 
- 809 - 
champã A  flower  of  the Plumeria genus.    It  is  white  with  a  yellow, 
red, or pink centre. 
chãndlo Small,  round  red  or  yellow  mark  applied  in  the  centre  of 
the  forehead  indicating  that  a  person  is  a  Hindu.    Usually 
made of either of kum-kum or of sandalwood paste.  
Chandra-Dev The dev of the Moon.  The dev of the man. 
chãndrãyan Strict  form  of  fasting  where  a  person's  intake  of  food  is 
regulated  by  the  waxing  and  waning  of  the  moon.    For 
example,  one  form  is  to  increase  food  intake  from  one 
small piece of food at the beginning of a new lunar month 
rising  to  fifteen  small  pieces  on Punam,  then  decreasing 
again  to  a  complete  fast  by Amãs;  or,  beginning  with 
fifteen  small  pieces  of  food  at  the  beginning  of  a  new 
month  and  decreasing  to  a  complete  fast  on Punam,  then 
increasing  again  to  fifteen  small  pieces  by Amãs.    Other 
forms involve having only eight small pieces a day, or four 
small pieces twice a day, or merely three pieces a day. 
chãran A  heavenly  poet.    Member  of  a  specific  class  of  people, 
considered  heavenly  in  origin,  as  they  were  employed  by 
devs to   compose   and   recite   verses   celebrating   their 
exploits. 
charitra A divine incident of Bhagvãn. 
chaul sanskãr The  ceremony  performed  when  the  hair  of  a  child  is 
removed.  This is the first time the child’s hair is cut. 
chetan That which possesses chaitanya (full of consciousness). 
chhint Indian cotton cloth on which a pattern has been produced 
by  dyeing  and  hand  drawing  with  a  bamboo.    Chhint 
would  usually  have  been  made  smooth  or  glossy  with  a 
shell  or  beaten  with  wooden  mallets  to  produce  a shiny 
surface. 
chhoglu A  bunch  of  cloth  either  emerging  from  the  end  of  a pãgh 
or  left  hanging  from  one  side.  Sometimes  inserted  into  a 
pãgh when made of a string of flowers. 
Chidãkãsh Akshardhãm.      Formless   and   pure chaitanya form   of 
Akshar.      By   nature, it   is   the   all-supporting   and   all-

Glossary 
- 810 - 
pervading ãkãsh,   extremely   luminous,   not   subject   to 
change,  and  eternal,  within  which Purush and Prakruti 
undergo  their  states  of  expansion  and  contraction.    Also 
known as Brahm. 
chihn A sign.  Refers to a birthmark or scar. 
chintãmani A   divine   gemstone   that   fulfils   all   of   the   wishes   of 
whomever posses it. 
chitt Consciousness.    One  of  the  four antah-karans,  with  the 
functions  of  contemplating  or  pondering  and  especially 
focusing.        Mental    impressions    and    experiences    are 
recorded    and    recalled    from    it.        The    entire    world 
inherently resides in a subtle form within it, and it is itself 
unchanging,  luminous,  pure, full  of  pure sattva-gun and 
passive. 
chofãl A thick shawl, made of cotton. 
chokadi Of  four.    The  time  of  four yugs (Satya-Yug, Tretã-Yug, 
Dvãpar-Yug, and Kali-Yug).  Also called Mahã-Yug. 
  
D  
dagli Waistcoat with inner lining, usually worn in cold weather. 
dahar-vidyã Knowledge  of  the  inner ãkãsh.    Knowledge  of Chidãkãsh.  
One of the thirty-two types of brahm-vidyã.  [Loyã 15]. 
dambh Hypocrisy.  To outwardly pretend to possess a quality to a 
great extent in order to impress others. 
dandvat pranãm Bowing  down  before Bhagvãn.    Men  perform ashtãng 
pranãm with  eight  parts  of  their  body,  whereas  women 
perform panchãng pranãm with  five  parts  of  the  body.  
The dandvat pranãm symbolises the breaking of our mãn.  
The  mind must  be kept on Bhagvãn while  performing the 
dandvat pranam. 
darbãr Court    of    residence    belonging    to    a    king    or    ruler, 
traditionally   with   a   central   courtyard   surrounded   by 
rooms with balconies. 

Glossary 
- 811 - 
darshan Seeing.    To  see  with  admiration  and  devotion.    To  see 
Bhagvãn,  a sat-purush,  and murtis,  with  inner  or  outer 
vision,  with  the  intention  of  receiving  their  grace  and 
blessings.    By  doing darshan properly  a bhakta develops 
affection for Bhagvãn, and Bhagvãn develops affection for 
that bhakta.  [Sãrangpur – 2]. 
dãs A servant. 
Dattatrey An avatãr of Bhagvãn,  born  to  Ansuyã  and  Atri  Rushi.  
Bhagvãn incarnated   in   the   combined svarup Brahmã, 
Vishnu, and Shiv.  He has three heads (Brahmã, Vishnu, and 
Shiv)  with  one  body.   Dattãtrey had  twenty-four gurus: 
earth,  air,  sky,  water,  fire,  sun,  moon,  python,  pigeon,  sea, 
moth, bee, elephant, bear, deer, fish, osprey, child, maiden, 
prostitute,   blacksmith,   serpent,   spider,   and   wasp.      He 
perceived gun in  His  twenty-four gurus.    He  believed  that 
in the world, a man can learn from each and every thing. 
deh Body. 
desh A region or place. 
dev A  demi-god  who  is  given  powers  and  responsibilities  in 
the  universe,  and  who  lives  in  a  higher lok.   Devs are 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn and follow His ãgnã. 
devi A demi-goddess. 
dhãm The  divine  home  of Bhagvãn.  Wherever Bhagvãn resides 
is called dhãm. 
dhanush A  bow;  symbolises  humility  and  strength.    A chihn on 
Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn’s left  foot.  Performing dhyãn on 
this chihn makes   a bhakta humble,   wise,   polite,   and 
fearless.   It also enables him to overcome inner enemies. 
Dhanvantari An avatãr of Bhagvãn.  He  incarnated  in  the svarup of  the 
physician of the devs. He introduced the world to Ãyurved 
medicine and surgery. For this reason, He is known as the 
father of Ãyurved. 
Dharma The dev of dharma. 
dharma 1) Universal  law  or  principle  that  'sustains'  or  'upholds' 
the   entire   world.   Righteousness,   morality,   religion, 

Glossary 
- 812 - 
responsibility, and duty.  
2) The practice of religious disciplines and duties, such as 
niyams – including honesty, brahm-chãrya, and ahinsã.  
One    of    the    four    attributes    of ekãntik dharma.  
Sometimes   referred   to   as   the 'dharma of   the   four 
varna and ãshrams’,  which  are  summarised  in  the 
panch-vartmãn. 
3) One of the four purushãrths, allowing for the fulfilment 
of a person's personal, domestic, and social duties. 
dharma-
dhurandhar  
The upholder and protector of dharma. 
Dharma-Kul Family  of  Dharma-Dev  (Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn’s father).  
Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn’s family.      The Ãchãrya of   our 
sampradãy are decedents  Dharma-Dev,  and  are  therefore 
the family of Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn.  
Dharma-Rãj The  lord  of Yampuri,  who  protects dharma by  punishing 
those who have sinned. Also called Yam-Rãj. 
Dharma-Shãstra A  set  of shãstras coding  the  basic  laws  and  principles  of 
civil  and  social  conduct.    They  integrate  spirituality  and 
political   law   by   including   the   discussion   of   creation, 
stages  of  life,  duties  of  daily  living, tap,  and  study  of  the 
Veds.  A part of the Smruti literature. 
dhãrnã Concentration.      The   sixth   step   of ashtãng-yog,   which 
involves    focusing    the    mind    to    guide    the    flow    of 
consciousness. 
dhoti An  unstitched,  long  piece  of  cloth  traditionally  worn  by 
males as a lower garment.  It is usually wound around the 
waist with one  end tucked in after passing it  between the 
legs. Also known as 'dhotiyu'. 
Dhruv Star Fixed star.  North Star.  This star is used by travellers as a 
useful  navigational  reference  marking  due  north.    Named 
after a devout bhakta named Dhruv. 
dhun Form   of jap often   to   the   accompaniment   of   musical 
instruments. 
dhvaj A  flag.    A chihn on Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn’s right  foot.    A 
flag  sits  above  a mandir,  and  is  also  carried  by  the  chief 

Glossary 
- 813 - 
warrior   of   an   army.      A   flag   also   symbolises   victory.   
Performing dhyãn on  this chihn leads  a bhakta to  live  by 
the ãgnã of Bhagvãn, just as a flag flutters according to the 
direction of the wind.  It also helps a bhakta overcome lust 
and other material desires. 
dhyãn Meditation.      The   seventh   step   of ashtãng-yog,   which 
involves  sustaining  a  concentrated  state  where  the  mind 
is clear and calm. 
dikshã Initiation into a sampradãy or initiation as a sant. 
Divãli Series of oil lamps.  Last day of the Vikram Samvat Indian 
year.  The day of Amãs of the month of Ãso.  Very holy and 
joyous   Hindu   festival   celebrating   the   return   of Rãm 
Bhagvãn to Ayodhyã from his fourteen-year exile, and the 
victory  of  good  over  evil - signified  by  the  lighting  of  oil 
lamps to dispel the darkness. 
divya Divine. 
dolariyã White   flower   of   the   jasmine   genus   called Jasminum 
sambac,  whose  blossoming  buds  are  considered  to  be 
especially  beautiful  when  swaying in  the  wind – from 
which it gets its name. 
drashtã The  seer.    Generally  refers  to  the ãtmã as  the  observer, 
but can also refer to Bhagvãn as the observer within each 
ãtmã. 
drashya 1) Visible.    An  object  of  vision.    Often  referring  to  the 
physical body.  [Sãrangpur-12]. 
2) Also taken to mean the visible world as a whole. 
dudh-pãk Rich   item   of   food   made   of   sweetened   milk   and   rice, 
garnished with aromatic spices and nuts. 
dukad Pair  of  traditional  Indian  drums  used  to  provide  rhythm 
during the singing of kirtans. Similar to present-day tablã. 
durlabh Invaluable.  Rare.  Precious. 
Dvait Dual.        A    philosophical    principle    that    proposes    the 
eternally  distinct  natures  of  the jeev and Bhagvãn,  as 
opposed to the principle of the Advait philosophy.  This is 
the  philosophy  accepted  by  Rãmãnuj-Ãchãrya,  Rãmãnand 

Glossary 
- 814 - 
Swami, and Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn. 
Dvãpar-Yug Third  of  the  four yugs that  mark  the  time-scale  of  the 
world.  Lasting 864,000 human years, it  was an age when 
purity and righteousness diminished considerably, people 
lived  to  be  1,000,  and  the  system  of the  four varnas came 
into full operation. 
dvip Island, or a landmass resembling an island. 
  
E  
Ekãdashi 1) Eleventh day  of  the  bright  and  dark  halves  of  a  lunar 
month (ek+das = 1+10 = 11). 
2) Special religious vrat performed on this day which also 
involves fasting and control of the ten indriyas and the 
mind. 
3) Name  of  the  young  woman  who  was  created  from  the 
light   of Bhagvãn's ten indriyas and   mind   to   battle 
against Mur-Dãnav.   [Gadhadã II-8]. 
ekadmal Former sãdhu,  who  left satang due   to  some  personal 
misconduct or his inability to conform to the life of a tyãgi, 
and  travels  alone  without  a  companion sãdhu.    This  is 
against   the niyams set   by Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn in 
which sãdhus should never travel alone. 
ekãntik The   highest spiritual   state,   in   which   a   person   offers 
perfect bhakti to Bhagvãn along  with dharma, gnãn and 
vairãgya. 
ekãntik bhakta 1) Highest  level  of bhakta.    A  person  who  offers ekãntik 
bhakti,  perfectly  possesses  all  four  of  the  qualities  of 
ekãntik dharma (dharma, gnãn, vairãgya, and bhakti). 
2) A person who has no desires other than Bhagvãn, and 
who  worships Bhagvãn while  realising  himself  to  be 
brahm-rup.  [Gadhadã I – 11]. 
ekãntik dharma Collective  term  for dharma, gnãn, vairãgya,  and bhakti 
coupled with the knowledge of Bhagvãn's greatness.  This 
will  lead  a  person  to   become  an ekãntik  bhakta who 
crosses Bhagvãn's Mãyã and attains His dhãm.  Also called 
bhãgvat dharma. 

Glossary 
- 815 - 
ekãntik sãdhu Highest  level  of sãdhu.    A sãdhu who  has  attained  the 
ekãntik state. 
  
F  
Fãgan Ninth  month  of the Ãshãdhi Samvat year,  normally  falling 
between February and March. 
feto Long  piece  of  cloth  that  can  be  twisted  and  tied  around 
the head, or placed over the shoulder and tied around the 
waist. 
  
G  
gadã Mace.  One of Bhagvãn’s weapons. 
gajarã Strings of flowers tied around the forearm. 
gandh A  smell.    One  of  the panch-vishays.   Gandh is  the  physical 
element  of pruthvi,  and  is  perceived  by  the  nose.    The 
characteristics of gandh are fragrance and stench.   
gandharva A heavenly being engaged in music, song and dance in the 
loks of the devs. 
Ganesh The dev known as the remover of obstacles.  He is the son 
of Shiv and Pãrvati, and has the body of a human, and the 
head  of  an  elephant.    His pujã is  performed  before  any 
religious  ceremony  or  auspicious  occasion.    Also  called 
Ganpati and Vignavinãyak.  Ganesh writes the charitras of 
Bhagvãn. 
Garud An eagle.  The vehicle of Vishnu. 
gaupad A cow’s footprint.  A chihn on Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn’s 
left  foot.    Performing dhyãn on  this chihn causes  the  vast 
material world to become the size of a cow’s hoof. 
ghadi Duration   of   time   equalling   approximately   twenty-four 
minutes. 
ghee This  is  clarified  butter  or  pure  butter  that  is  formed  by 
heating it until the impurities in it settle to the bottom. 

Glossary 
- 816 - 
gnãn 1) Knowledge.  Spiritual knowledge leading to kalyãn.  In 
particular,  the  knowledge  of  the ãtmã,  and Bhagvãn’s 
svarup and His greatness.  One of the four attributes of 
ekãntik dharma. 
2) Also used to mean ãtmã-nishthã or ãtmã-gnãn. 
gnãni A person with gnãn.  One of the four types of bhaktas. 
gnãn-indriya Cognitive  sense,  through  which  a  person  can  ‘know'.  
There  are  five gnãn-indriyas:  hearing  (ears),  touch  (skin), 
sight (eyes), taste (tongue) and smell (nose).  They engage 
themselves   in   their   respective vishays and   have   the 
complete knowledge  of that vishay.  The sense organs are 
not  to  be  confused  with  the indriyas (the  senses).    The 
sense  organs  are  part  of  the  physical  body,  whereas  the 
indriyas (senses) are distinct from the physical body. 
gnãn-pralay Destruction  by gnãn.    A  state  of  individual  understanding 
in  which Prakruti-Purush and  the  entities  evolved  from 
them  do  not  come  into  view,  and  a  person  sees  only  pure 
chaitanya,   within   which   only   the murti of Bhagvãn 
resides,  but  no  other  forms  remain.    All mãyik influences 
are  destroyed – as  if ãtyantik-pralay has  taken  place  for 
that particular individual. 
gnãn-shakti The  power  of  understanding.    Aware  of  actions.    When  a 
jeev enters  the jãgrat state, Bhagvãn awakens  it  from 
unconsciousness  through  His gnãn-shakti and  makes  it 
aware of its actions. 
gnãn-yagna When  a bhakta of Bhagvãn engages  in antar-drashti,  it  is 
called   a gnãn-yagna.       Physical   activities   related    to 
Bhagvãn,    such    as    having    the darshan of Bhagvãn, 
performing  His pujã or  engaging  in kathã and kirtans of 
Bhagvãn, to see that murti of Bhagvãn within the heart, to 
perform  its pujã,  and  to  bow  before  it,  are  all forms  of 
antar-drashti, and are therefore aspects of a gnãn-yagna. 
Golok 1) The dhãm of Shree Krishna Bhagvãn.  
2) Also  means Akshardhãm.  The prefix ‘go’ means  light; 
therefore, meaning the ‘lok of light’ – Akshardhãm. 
Gopinãthji The murti of Shree   Krishna Bhagvãn.    Swãminãrãyan 
Bhagvãn installed   a murti of   Gopinãthji   Mahãrãj   in 
Gadhadã,  which  was  made  to  the  exact  size  of  Shreeji 

Glossary 
- 817 - 
Mahãrãj. 
gopi Protectors  of cows.    Wives  of the  cowherds  of Vrundãvan 
present during the time of Shree Krishna.  Female bhaktas 
of Bhagvãn who  represent  the  perfect  love  and bhakti 
towards Bhagvãn. 
gor Jaggery.  Sweet food made directly from sugarcane, and is 
yellow-brown in colour. 
gorakh-ãsan An ãsan to  protect  the indriyas.    Specific  yogic ãsan or 
sitting posture where a person sits with both heels tucked 
into the groin, the toes folded under the buttocks, and the 
large   toes   held   by   the   hands   from   behind   the   back.  
Considered to help in preventing the ejaculation of semen, 
and therefore helping in the observance of brahm-chãrya.  
Also known as goraksh-ãsan or bhadrãsan. 
grahastha Householder.    A  person  who  is  married.    A  person  who  is 
in the second stage of life, the grahastha ãshram. 
grahastha ãshram Second  of  the  four  stages  of  life,  when  a  person  enters 
married  life  to  fulfil  the  duties  of  a  householder.    At  the 
end   of grahastha ashram,   a   person   enters vãnprasth 
ãshram. 
grahn Nose.  Physical organ of smell (one of the indriyas). 
guchh Bunches  of  flowers,  usually  placed  above  the  ears  or  in 
the pãgh. 
gulãb Rose. 
guldãvadi Flower  of  the  chrysanthemum  genus,  found  to  blossom 
unusually out of season.  Also known as sevati. 
gun 
(pronounced goon) 
1) Good quality or trait.  
2) Principle  quality of Prakruti or Mãyã.   There are three 
in  total:   sattva-gun (goodness  and  awareness), rajo-
gun (passion  and  desires),  and tamo-gun (darkness, 
ignorance, and laziness).  All beings are affected by the 
influence of one or a combination of these three gun of 
Mãyã until  they  become gunãtit.  The gun bring  out 
different  types  of  moods  in  a  person:    a  person  in 
sattva-gun is  calm,  and  peaceful;  a  person  in rajo-gun 

Glossary 
- 818 - 
is  desirous,  and  enthusiastic;  a  person  in tamo-gun is 
volatile, lazy, and drowsy. 
gunãtit Beyond the three gun of Mãyã (sattva-gun, rajo-gun, tamo-
gun).  That which has no trace or influence of Mãyã. 
guru A teacher.  He will guide you on the path of kalyãn. 
gutko A small notebook. 
  
H  
hajãri Marigold. A large, yellow-orange flower. 
Hanumãnji A dev with  the svarup of  a  monkey.    He  is  courageous, 
brave, and a loyal bhakta of Shree Rãm. 
Hari An avatãr of Bhagvãn.    He  incarnated  in  His  four-armed 
svarup to   save   an   elephant   from   being   killed   by   a 
crocodile.  He cut off the crocodile’s head with His chakra. 
haribhakta A bhakta of Shree   Hari.      A bhakta of Swãminãrãyan 
Bhagvãn. 
harmo A  small  tree  which  blossoms  with  white  flowers,  found 
generally in the Kutch region of Gujarãt. 
Hayagriv An avatãr of Bhagvãn.    He  incarnated  in  the svarup of  a 
horse.   Brahmã had  become  tired  of  his  creative  duties, 
and he wanted to rest. As night was approaching, Brahmã 
yawned, which caused all the four Veds to come out  from 
his  opened  mouth.    A  demon   who  lived  near  him   in 
disguise,   abducted   the   Veds.    Bhagvãn took   birth   as 
Hayagriv to kill the demon and protect the Veds. 
hinsã Violence. 
Hiranyagarbh An avatãr of Bhagvãn.   
hruday-ãkãsh Space within the heart.  Spiritual region of the heart.  The 
inner self.  Place where the jeev resides. 
  
I  

Glossary 
- 819 - 
ichhã-shakti The power of free  will.  Whatever object is desired by the 
jeev, is acquired with the help of Bhagvãn’s ichhã-shakti. 
idã nãdi Nerve   or   channel   of   a   feminine   nature   transmitting 
physical  and  emotional  energy  within  the  inner  body  of  a 
person, where the current of energy flows downward and 
ends  on  the  left  side  of  the  body.    One  of  the  three  major 
nãdis:  the idã nãdi,  the pingalã nãdi,  and  the sushumnã 
nãdi. 
Indra The king of the devs.  He resides in Svarg-Lok. 
indriyas A sense, through which a person can ‘know’ and ‘perform 
actions’.  There are ten indriyas in  total - the  five gnãn-
indriyas (cognitive  senses)  and  the  five karma-indriyas 
(conative  senses),  with  the  mind  often  taken  to  be  the 
eleventh indriya.  They   engage   themselves   in   their 
respective vishays and  have  the  complete  knowledge  of 
that vishay.  The sense organs are not to be confused with 
the indriyas (the senses).  The sense organs are part of the 
physical  body,  whereas  the indriyas (senses)  are  distinct 
from the physical body.  
 five gnãn-indriyas:    hearing    (ears/shrotra),    touch 
(skin/tvak), sight (eyes/chakshu), taste 
(tongue/rasnã) and smell (grahn) 
 five karma-indriyas:    speech    (voice/vãk),    handling 
(hands/pãni), walking (feet/pãd), excretion 
(anus/pãyu) and procreation (genitals/upastha) 
irshyã Jealousy  of  a  quality  of  or  skill.    A  person  with irshyã 
cannot    tolerate    others    being    honoured    and    cannot 
tolerate  their  greatness;  and  they  act  to  harm  the  person 
they are jealous of. [Sãrangpur – 8]. 
ishta-dev The   preferred murti of Bhagvãn that   worshiped   by   a 
person.   Our ishta-dev is Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn;  but,  the 
ishta-dev of Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn was Shree Krishna. 
ishvar 1) Infinite  in  number.    Similar  to  the jeev with  respect  to 
being bound by Mãyã, but are involved in the creation, 
sustenance,  and  destructions  of  the brahmãnds,  and 
are   therefore   given   greater   powers   by Bhagvãn.  
Brahmã, Vishnu, Shiv and all entities greater than them 
upwards to Prakruti-Purush, are considered ishvars. 

Glossary 
- 820 - 
2) Second  of  the  five  eternal  entities – jeev, ishvar, Mãyã, 
Brahm, Parbrahm. 
Ishvar See Bhagvãn. 
  
J  
jad Lifeless.  Non-living.  Has no ãtmã.  Opposite of chaitanya.  
That which is without consciousness. 
jad prakruti 1) Eight    non-chaitanya (lifeless)    components    of   the 
world:    pruthvi, jal, tej, vãyu, ãkãsh, maha-tattva, 
Pradhãn-Prakruti and Mul-Prakruti.  
2) The  Bhagvad  Geetã  mentions  these  to  be pruthvi, jal, 
tej, vãyu, ãkãsh, man, buddhi and ahankãr.  [Loyã – 7]. 
jãgrat Awake.  One of the three mental states.  The jãgrat state is 
the result of the sustenance state of Virãt-Purush.  It is full 
of sattva-gun and  is  located  in  the  region  of  the  eyes.    In 
the jãgrat state,  the jeevãtmã is  known  as vishva,  and  is 
conscious of its sthul body. [Sãrangpur – 6]. 
Jain A  follower  of Jainism – the  non-Vedic  religion  of  India 
propagating  strict ahinsã, tyãg,  and karmas as  being  the 
only  factor  responsible  for  creation  and  the  continuing 
unfolding events and activities of the world.  According to 
Jain  philosophy, karmas themselves  can  grant  their  own 
rewards.  Therefore, Bhagvãn is  not  a  necessary  element 
of their philosophy. 
jal Water.    Liquid  matter.    One  of  the  five bhuts,  from  which 
the  physical  world  (Virãt-Purush)  is  formed.    It  binds 
pruthvi and  other  substances,  and  it  also  softens  and 
moistens all objects. It satisfies and sustains all life-forms, 
it quenches thirst, and suppresses heat. 
jal-basti Flushing   with   water.      A   strict   yogic   practice   to   help 
cleanse the inner parts of the body, which in turn helps in 
the  observance  of brahm-chãrya.    The  practice  involves 
standing   in   waist-high   water   and   drawing   in   water 
through the anus, swirling the water around the stomach, 
and  then  discharging  it  again  through  the  anus.    Another 
version of the practice involves drawing in water through 

Glossary 
- 821 - 
the  genitals  and  then  flushing  it  out  either  through  the 
genitals or the anus. 
jãmbu A  berry.    A chihn on Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn’s right  foot.  
Performing dhyãn on  this chihn ensures  that  a bhakta 
loses  interest  in  everything  else  and  feels  that  all worldly 
affairs are worthless. 
jãmo A  long-sleeved,  upper  garment  that  is  made  of  a  thick 
cloth,  with  rich  embroidery.  It  reaches  down  below  the 
knees, and is tied at the waist with long strings. 
jangam Mobile.    Animate.    Life-forms  such  as  humans, animals, 
and birds. 
Janmãshtami Birthday  of Shree  Krishna – Shrãvan vadi 8.    A  fast  if kept 
on this day, and it is celebrated with great festivity. 
jap  
(pronounced jup) 
Continuous   chanting   or   writing   of   the   holy   name   of 
Bhagvãn. 
jarãyuj Born from a womb.   The life-forms  born  from  wombs (all 
mammals, including humans). 
jav A barley grain.  A chihn on Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn’s right 
toe.  Performing dhyãn on  this chihn destroys  all  sins, 
purifies    the    mind,    and    grants    a    person    with    the 
knowledge   of ãtmã and Paramãtmã.      It   also   ensures 
enough worldly wealth and comforts. 
jeev 1) That  which  is  living.    Infinite  in  number.    Individual, 
embodied ãtmã still bound  by Mãyã and consequently 
undergoing  the  cycle  of  births  and  deaths.    The jeev is 
not  separate  the  three  bodies  (sthul, sukshma,  and 
kãran) and the three mental states (jãgrat, svapna, and 
sushupti),     whereas     the ãtmã is     distinct     from 
everything. 
2) First of the five eternal entities (jeev, ishvar, Mãyã, and 
Akshar, and Parbrahm). 
3) Sometimes used to mean the same as ãtmã.  
jeevãtmã 
See jeev. 
jhãnjh Pair  of  small,  cymbals – slightly  larger  than manjirãs - 
used     in     the     accompaniment     of     other     percussion 

Glossary 
- 822 - 
instruments. 
jignãsu A person who seeks knowledge of the ãtmã (ãtmã-nisthã).  
One of the four types of bhaktas. 
Jyeshth The  twelfth  month  of  the Ãshãdhi Samvat year,  normally 
falling between May and June. 
  
K  
kailãs The place where Shiv resides and performs tap. 
kaivalyãrthi A   person   who   worships   only Bhagvãn in   order   to 
experience  the ãtmã.    He  is  of  an  intermediate  level.  
[Ashlãli – 1] 
kãl  Time.  The continuous phenomenon of the  progression  of 
existence  and  events.    It  allows  for  the  past,  present  and 
future,   and   ultimately   leads   to   the   destruction   of   all 
things.  [Loyã – 9]. 
Kãl Cause   of   death.      A dev that   remains   in   the ãgnã of 
Bhagvãn, but carries out his duties of his own free will.  If 
Bhagvãn wishes, He may interfere with Kãl’s  duties.  
kalash A  brass  water-pot.    A chihn on Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn’s 
left  foot.    By performing dhyãn on  this chihn a bhakta 
attains total fulfilment and becomes akshar-rup.   A kalash 
occupies the highest point on the shikhar of a mandir, and 
so the bhakta attains the highest dhãm, Akshardhãm. 
Kali-Yug Age of Darkness.  Fourth and present of the four ages that 
mark the time-scale of the world.  Kali-Yug began in 3102 
BCE,  after  Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn left  the  earth.    It  lasts 
for 432,000 human years, of which over 5,000 years have 
already  passed.    The  current Kali-Yug is  estimated  to  end 
in  the  year  428,889  CE.   Kali-Yug is  when  purity  and 
righteousness have  thoroughly diminished  in comparison 
to  what  they  were  in Satya-Yug.    People  generally  live  to 
be  not  more  than  a  hundred,  and svabhãvs prevail  in 
greater abundance than ever before. 
Kalki An avatãr of Bhagvãn that  is  still  yet  to  appear  on  earth.  
Bhagvãn will  incarnate  in  the svarup of  a  destroyer who 

Glossary 
- 823 - 
will  come  riding  on  his   white  horse   with  his  blazing 
sword  in  his  hand.  He  will  take  birth  towards  the  end  of 
this Kali-Yug.  Kalki will punish and kill the evil sinners of 
the world.  The universe will then be destroyed. 
kalp-vruksh A  special  tree  possessing  the  magical  power  to  fulfil  the 
wishes  of  anyone  who  sits  under  it.    It  is  one  of  the 
fourteen  divine  objects  that  emerged  from  the samudra 
manthan.  The kalp-vruksh lives  for  one kalp (4,32  x  10
9
 
years). 
kalyãn 1) Liberation.    Freedom  from  the  cycle  of  births  and 
deaths. 
2) To take birth as a higher life-form, or to take birth in a 
higher lok. 
kalyãn-kãri Liberating.    The  cause  of kalyãn.    The  cause  of moksh.  
That  which  causes  a jeev to  break  free  from  the  cycle  of 
births and deaths. 
kãm 1) Lust.  Passion.  Desire.  [Gadhadã I – 73] 
2) One of the four purushãrths, allowing for the fulfilment 
of a person's personal and social desires. 
kamal A  lotus.    A chihn on Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn’s right  foot.  
Performing dhyãn on   this chihn enables   a bhakta to 
remain free of material attachments and focus his mind at 
the  feet  of Bhagvãn.    Just  as  a kamal is  able  to  blossom 
even in muddy water, similarly, a bhakta is able to remain 
free   of   material attachments,   despite   fulfilling   all   his 
worldly  duties  obligations.    Just  as  a kamal does  not  sink 
into  water,  a bhakta is  not  submerged  by  the  forces  of 
inner enemies, attachments, and material pleasures. 
kamandalu A wooden water pot, with a handle. 
Kãm-Dev The dev of lust and passion. 
Kanbi A   class   of   people   of   the Vaishya varna traditionally 
engaged in farming and rearing cattle. 
kanishth Lowest. 
kanthi Double-threaded  necklace;  usually  made  of tulsi beads, 
received by satsangis upon initiation into the 

Glossary 
- 824 - 
Swãminãrãyan  Sampradãy,  and  worn  as  a  sign  of  their 
connection to Bhagvãn.  
kapat Deceit.  To deceive someone by showing false actions and 
behaviour. 
Kapil Geetã A  portion  of  the Shreemad  Bhãgvat consisting  of Kapil-
Dev's teachings to His mother, Devhuti. 
Kapil-Dev An avatãr of Bhagvãn.    He  incarnated  in  the svarup of  a 
rushi to  compile  all  the  divine  knowledge  that  had  been 
destroyed.    He   gave   the   knowledge   of   the   Sãnkhya 
philosophy   to   his   mother   Devhuti,   which   was   later 
written in the Shreemad Bhãgvat by Vyãsji. 
kãran Fundamental.  One of the three bodies of the jeev.  It is the 
fundamental  body,  consisting  of  the jeev's desires,  which 
causes  the jeev to  take  birth  again.    The kãran body  itself 
is  ignorance  that  has  been  fused  with  the jeev.    It  retains 
the jeev's sanchit karmas and is the cause of the sthul and 
sukshma bodies just as a seed is the cause of a tree. 
karma Action.  Deed.  Any thought, word, or deed that will sooner 
or  later  reap  its  consequences.   Karmas of  a  person  are 
linked to their rewards (cause and effect).  Bhagvãn is the 
giver  of  the  rewards  of  the karmas;  good  deeds  reap 
pleasant   rewards,   and   bad   deeds   reap   painful   fruits.  
Karmas remain   with   a jeev until   it   has   received   its 
rewards.  
 
There  are  three  types  of karmas:   sanchit  karmas (deeds 
accumulated   over   infinite   births), prãrabdha   karmas 
(deeds  whose  consequences  are  already  set  in  motion) 
and kriyamãn  karmas (deeds  whose  consequences  are  in 
the process of being formed). 
karma-indriya Conative   sense,   through   which   a   person   can   perform 
actions.    The  organ  that  is  the  physical  aspect  of  a  sense.  
There  are  five karma-indriyas:    speech  (voice),  handling 
(hands),  walking  (feet),  excretion  (anus)  and  procreation 
(genitals).    They  engage  themselves  in  their  respective 
vishays and  have  the  complete  knowledge  of  that vishay.  
The sense organs are not to be confused with the indriyas 
(the  senses).    The  sense  organs  are  part  of  the  physical 

Glossary 
- 825 - 
body,  whereas  the indriyas (senses)  are  distinct  from  the 
physical body. 
karma-yogi A    person    is    striving    for    karma-yog    (yog    through 
activities).  Term used for a grahastha bhakta who has not 
renounced    his/her    worldly    duties    completely – as 
opposed  to  a sãnkhya-yogi – but  is  nevertheless  sincerely 
striving for yog or kalyãn.    Refers to the many grahasthas 
in   the   time   of Swãminãrãyan   Bhagvãn who   chose   to 
totally commit and dedicate their lives to satsang. 
karnikãr A  red  or  yellow  scented  oleander  flower  called Thevetia 
neiifolia.  The  yellow karnikãr are  single  flowers  about 
5cm  in  length,  whereas  the  red karnikãr are  clustered  on 
one   flower   stalk.       The karnikãr mentioned   in   the 
Vachanãmrut refers to the red karnikãr. 
Kãrtik Fifth  month  of  the Ãshãdhi Samvat year,  normally  falling 
between October and November. 
kartum The all-doer.  Bhagvãn does everything and is the cause of 
everything.  
kathã Religious talks and discussions.  
Kãyasth Community  of  people  or  a  person  born  of brãhman and 
kshatriya parents, traditionally engaged in political affairs. 
kediyu A long-sleeved, upper garment that is pleated at the chest, 
and reaches down to the waist. Approximately twelve feet 
of cloth is used up in the pleats. 
keval-gnãn Perfect   or   ultimate gnãn,   as   described   in   the nãstik 
philosophy.  The final state of realisation. 
khand Continent.  Large land mass or region. 
khes Piece  of  cloth  that  can  be  worn  as  a  shawl  to  cover  the 
upper body, or worn as a dhoti to cover the lower body. 
khir Rich   item   of   food   made   of   sweetened   milk   and   rice, 
garnished   with   aromatic   spices   and   nuts,   and   usually 
served hot. 
kinkhãb Fine  silken fabric  brocaded  with  golden  or  silver  threads, 
originally made only in Egypt. 

Glossary 
- 826 - 
kirtan Divine  songs  about Bhagvãn and  His charitras,  usually 
sung to the accompaniment of musical instruments. 
kodrã Low  quality  of  grain  lacking  in  nutrition.    Similar  in  size 
and  shape  to  mustard  seeds,  but  white  in  colour.    Stored 
in   times   of   famine   because   of   its   resilience   against 
extreme weather conditions and time, but generally eaten 
only by the poor. 
Krishna 1) An avatãr of Bhagvãn.  He incarnated in the svarup of a 
cowherd.    This  is  considered  to  be  a  greater avatãr 
than  the  others,  as  Shree  Krishna  possessed  all  of  the 
powers  of Bhagvãn,  whereas  other avatãrs possessed 
less  power.   Shree  Krishna  conveyed  the  message  of 
love  and  humanity  to  the  world.    Also,  He recited  the 
epic  poem,  the  Bhagvad  Geetã,  to  Arjun  in  which  He 
stated:    ‘Whenever dharma declines   and adharma 
increases,  I  shall  incarnate  myself  as  a  human  to  save 
the   holy,   to   destroy   the   sin   of   the   sinner,   and   to 
establish dharma.  I come into being from yug to yug’. 
2) In  the  Vachanãmrut,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  also  uses  the 
name  “Shree Krishna”  to  describe Bhagvãn 
Purushottam Nãrãyan. 
kriyã Deed.  Action. 
kriyamãn karma Deeds  whose  consequences  are  in  the  process  of  being 
formed.   Current  deeds - including  words  and  thoughts - 
which  will  eventually  be  added  to  the  stock  of karmas 
(sanchit karmas)  until  they  'ripen'  to  give  rewards  as 
prãrabdha karmas,  either  later  in  the  present  life  or  in  a 
future life. 
kriyã-shakti The power of application.   Whatever action a jeev engages 
in,  it  does  so   with  the  support  of  what  is  known  as 
Bhagvãn’s kriyã-shakti. 
krodh Anger.  [Loyã – 1] 
kruchhra 
chãndrãyan 
Form of strictness which involves regulating the intake of 
food over prolonged periods of time, generally performed 
as a form of prãyshchit for a grave sin. 
kruchrãti kruchhra Form   of   harsh tap which   involves   a   twelve-day vrat: 
drinking water once daily for the first nine days, followed 

Glossary 
- 827 - 
by three days of complete fasting. 
krutaghni An ungrateful and selfish person.  [Gadhadã I – 10] 
kshatriya Person  of  power  and  courage,  traditionally  responsible 
for  the  formation  and  enforcement  of  law  within  society, 
as  well  as  its  safety.    Rulers  and  warriors  of  society.    The 
second  of  the  four varnas (castes)  of  the  ancient  Indian 
social system. 
kshetra 1) Field.  Territory.  Place of dwelling.  
2) Often  used  with kshetragna to  describe  a  relationship 
similar to that between some land and its owner – the 
kshetra is the land, and the kshetragna its owner. 
kshetragna Knower  of kshetra. Often  used  with kshetra to describe  a 
relationship  similar  to  that  between  a  landowner  and  his 
land – kshetragna is the owner,  and  the kshetra is  the 
land. Used    to    describe    the ãtmã as    the    master 
(kshetragna)  of  the  three  bodies  (kshetra). Also  used  to 
describe Bhagvãn as  the  master  (kshetragna)  of  all jeevs, 
ishvars, and Brahm (kshetra). [Panchãlã – 3]. 
Kuber A dev who is the personal accountant of the other devs. 
kudã-panthi Follower  of a  cult  whose  beliefs  are  against  the  teachings 
of the Veds.  They falsely state the five 'M’ as a means to 
kalyãn.    They  are:    madya  (alcohol),  mãns  (meat),  matsya 
(fish), mudrã (occult markings on the body), and maithun 
(illicit sex).  One of the four types of kusangis. 
kum-kum A  fine,  red  powder – traditionally  made  of  saffron – used 
by   Hindus   during   worship.      It   is   also   applied   to   the 
forehead to form a chãndlo. 
kunjar-kriyã Elephant  act.    A  strict yogic practice  to  help  cleanse  the 
inner  parts  of  the  body - which  in  turn  helps  in  the 
observance   of brahm-chãrya.      The   practice   involves 
drinking   a   considerable   amount   of   water,   swirling   it 
around  the  stomach,  and  then  discharging  it  out  again 
through the mouth. 
Kurma An avatãr of Bhagvãn.    He  incarnated  in  the svarup of  a 
turtle.    During  the samudra  manthan (churning  of  the 
ocean),  the  Mount Mandarãnchal that  was  used  to  churn 

Glossary 
- 828 - 
the ocean, began to sink into the soft ocean bed.  Bhagvãn 
assumed  the avatãr of  a  turtle,  and  went  into  the  ocean 
where  His  shell  was  used  as  a  pivot  to  churn  the  ocean 
with the mountain. 
kusang The association of an evil person. 
kusangi A  person  who  is  bad  company.    A kusangi has  a  bad 
influence on someone’s progress in satsang,  and  leads 
them   astray   from satsang.      There   are   four   types   of 
kusangis:  shakti-panthi, kudã-panthi, shushka-vedãnti, and 
nãstik. 
  
L  
lãdu Sweet item of food made principally of flour, ghee, and gor 
or sugar, shaped into small balls. 
Lakshmi A devi (goddess) who is the  wife of Vishnu.  She is the devi 
of   wealth.   Therefore,   money   and   gold   is   also   called 
Lakshmi. She eternally remains in the sevã of Bhagvãn. 
Lakshmi-Nãrãyan The murti of Lakshmi and Vãsudev-Nãrãyan. 
lav Duration   of   time   equalling   approximately 
1
/
150
 of   a 
second, or 
1
/
16
 of the time taken to blink. 
leelã A divine action performed by Bhagvãn. 
lobh Greed.  Craving for wealth. 
lok Place.  Region.  World. 
  
M  
mad Arrogance. 
Mãdhvi Sampradãy A sampradãy that   follows   the   philosophy   of   Mãdhvã-
Ãchãrya,  a  13th  century  South  Indian  Vaishnav ãchãrya.  
He  proposed  a  principle  that  states  there  is  an  essential 
and  eternal  distinction  between Bhagvãn and  all  other 
beings. 

Glossary 
- 829 - 
madhyã 1) Intermediate.  Medium. 
2) Used  to  describe  the gopis.    The madhyã gopis would 
never  become  angry  with Bhagvãn and  would  never 
speak    harsh    words.        However,    by    using    their 
shrewdness,   they   would   use   cunning   methods   to 
conceal their selfishness from others and do whatever 
they   pleased while   also   doing   whatever   pleased 
Bhagvãn.     Therefore,  they  would   not  do   only  that 
which pleased Bhagvãn. [Sãrangpur – 15] 
madhyam Medium.  Intermediate. 
madhyamã When  the  ‘parã’ speech   reached   the   throat   of Virãt-
Purush, it became known by the name of ‘madhyamã’. 
Mãgdhi Dialect   specific    to   Magadh,    the    southern    region    of 
present-day  Bihãr.    It  is  the  language  of  the  ancient  Jain 
and Buddhist shãstras. 
Mãgshar Sixth  month  of  the Ãshãdhi Samvat year,  normally  falling 
between November and December. 
Mahã Eighth month of the Ãshãdhi Samvat year, normally falling 
between January and February. 
Mahãbhãrat The  great  epic  of  India.    A shãstra revolving  around  the 
family  feud  between  the  Pãndavs  and  the  Kauravs,  which 
ends in a great battle.   With over 100,000 verses, it is the 
world's longest poem. 
mahã-bhuts Major  elements.    Collective  term  for  the  five  physical 
elements that evolve from tãmas-ahankãr and from which 
the physical world is formed.  They are:  pruthvi (earth or 
solid  matter), jal (water  or  liquid matter), tej (light  or 
energy), vãyu (air or gaseous matter), and ãkãsh (space or 
vacuum).    Each  one  has  a  root  cause,  called  its tanmãtrãs 
or vishay: smells, tastes, sights, touch, and sounds. 
Mahã-Mãyã See Prakruti. 
Mahã-Purush 1) Also called Mul-Purush, Akshar-Purush, and Purush. 
2) The svarup of Bhagvãn that  resides  in Shvet-Dvip,  and 
gives darshan to the niranna-muktas. 
maha-tattva Major  element.    Equivalent  to  the chitt of  the jeev,  but  on 

Glossary 
- 830 - 
an   immense   level.      First   of   the   entities   produced   by 
Pradhãn-Purush.      The  entire  world  resides  within  it  in  a 
subtle  form.  It  is  itself  unchanging,  luminous,  pure,  and 
full of pure sattva-gun.  [Gadhadã I – 12]. 
Mahã-Yug The  time  of  four yugs (Satya-Yug, Tretã-Yug, Dvãpar-Yug, 
and Kali-Yug). Also called chokadi. 
mãlã A rosary made of 108 beads, which is usually made of tulsi 
or  sandalwood.    The mãlã is  turned  with  the  right  hand, 
by placing it over the middle finger and moving each bead 
one by one with the thumb, while reciting 
“Swãminãrãyan”. 
malãr A  musical rãg of  Indian  music.    Considered  to  induce 
rainfalls if sung correctly. 
man  
(pronounced mun) 
Mind.    One  of  the  four antah-karans,  with  the  function  of 
generating  thoughts  and  desires,  and  governing  all  of  the 
indriyas. 
mãn Pride.        When    a    person    wants someone    else    to 
acknowledge them as superior. 
manan To think about.   Contemplation.  To mentally think over a 
talk, and to discard parts of the talk which are not needed 
and to retain the parts of the talk which are useful.  
mandal Group   or   assembly.      In   the   time   of Swãminãrãyan 
Bhagvãn,   the sãdhus were   often   formed   into   groups, 
within  which  they  travelled  and  preached  in  different 
regions. 
mandir Temple.  Sacred Hindu place of worship. 
manjirã Pair of small, cymbals used in the accompaniment of other 
percussion instruments. 
manomay chakra The  mind  in  the  form  of  a  wheel.    The  mind,  seen  as  a 
constantly  turning  wheel,  whose  ten  spikes  are  taken  to 
be the ten indriyas.  [Sãrangpur – 7]. 
manovahã nãdi  Nerve  or  channel  in  which  the  mind  resides,  transmitting 
energy within the inner body of a person and allowing the 
flow of desires and thoughts. 

Glossary 
- 831 - 
mãnsi pujã Mental  worship.    Form  of  worship  in  which  a  person 
devoutly  performs pujã of Bhagvãn mentally - exactly  as 
he would physically. 
mantra 1) A repeated word or phrase. 
2) A    sacred    verbal    phrase    repeated    in    prayer,    or 
meditation, such as ‘Swãminãrãyan’.  Wicked people 
use mantras to cast evil curses. 
Manu Manu is  responsible  for  overseeing  the  first  stages  of  all 
life forms in the new cycle of creation and he lives for the 
entire  cycle.   Manu and  his  wife  become  the  first  parents 
for  each  cycle  (Adam  and  Eve).    In  one  day  of Brahmã, 
fourteen Manus reign and die.  The duration of the reign of 
one Manu is  306,720,000  human  years,  and  is  called  a 
manvantar.  Fourteen Manus are  created  and  destroyed 
during one day of Brahmã. 
manvantar The  duration  of  the  reign  of  one  of  the  fourteen Manus 
that   reign   sequentially   during    one   day   of Brahmã.  
Duration of time equalling 306,720,000 human years. 
Mãrgi A  Follower  of  the  Vãm-Mãrg  (cult  of  lust),  an  anti-Vedic 
cult   that   promotes    illicit   sex   and   other    prohibited 
practices as a means to kalyãn. 
matsar Jealousy of objects.  Jealousy that arises in a person when 
someone  else  has  a  better  object  or  item  than  himself.  
[Kãriyãni – 6]. 
Matsya An avatãr of Bhagvãn.    He  incarnated  in  the svarup of  a 
fish when   a   flood   destroyed   the   world.      He   saved 
humanity   by   saving Satyavrat   from   the   great   flood.  
Satyavrat  became  the  first  human  in  the  new  world,  and 
became known as Manu.  He also saved the Veds text from 
the flood.  As Manu was lonely, he prayed for children, and 
was  granted  a  wife.   Manu and  his  wife  become  the  first 
parents   for   each   cycle   (Adam   and   Eve).    Manu is 
responsible for overseeing the first stages of all life forms 
in  the  new  cycle  of  creation  and  he  lives  for  the  entire 
cycle. 
Matsya A  fish.    A chihn on Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn’s left  foot.  
Performing dhyãn on  this chihn grants  a bhakta with  a 
stable mind.  It also empowers him to live life absorbed in 

Glossary 
- 832 - 
the murti of Bhagvãn. 
mãyã That which obstructs a bhakta from focusing on Bhagvãn.  
[Gadhadã I – 1]. 
Mãyã 1) Power    of Bhagvãn used    as    the    fundamental 
'substance'  of  creation.    It  is  composed  of  the  three 
gun,  is  both jad and chaitanya, eternal, nirvishesh, 
and in its dormant state (before the time of creation) 
– it houses all jeevs and ishvars, and all the tattvas.  It 
is   inspired   by,   controlled   by,   and   dependent   on 
Bhagvãn.    The jeevs and ishvars must  go  beyond 
Mãyã (eradicate  it  within  themselves)  in  order  to 
attain Akshardhãm.      Everything   in   the   world   is 
produced  from  the  products  of Mãyã.    Also  called 
Prakruti. 
2) Third  of  the  five  eternal  entities  (jeev, ishvar, Mãyã, 
and Brahm, and Parbrahm). 
mãyik That  which  is  composed  of  the  products  of Mãyã.    False.  
Worldly.  That which is destroyed. 
medi A small room above a house or a mansion. 
mogrã A  flower  of the  jasmine  genus  called Jasminum  sambac or 
Arabian  jasmine.    It  has  a  white  colour  and  extremely 
sweet fragrance.  Traditionally used in offerings to murtis 
of Bhagvãn. 
moh Infatuation.  Attraction. 
Mohini An avatãr of Bhagvãn.    He  incarnated  in  the svarup of  a 
beautiful  lady.    After  the devs and  demons  had  churned 
the  oceans  to  extract  the  nectar  that  would  give  them 
immortality,  there  was  a  fight  over  the  possession  of  the 
urn.   Bhagvãn realised  that  if the  argument  continued for 
long  then  the  nectar  would  spill  out  and  be  lost  forever.  
He  also  did  not  want  the  demons  to  drink  any  of  the 
nectar.  So, He appeared as Mohini, a lady of great beauty.  
Both  the devs and  the  demons  stopped  fighting  and  were 
attracted  to  Her  beauty.  Flaunting  Her  charms,  Mohini 
convinced  both  the devs and  the  demons  that  she  would 
distribute the nectar.  
moksh Liberation.    Salvation.    Breaking  free  from  the  cycle  of 

Glossary 
- 833 - 
births and deaths.  To attain Akshardhãm. 
Moksh-Dharma A   portion   of   the   Mahãbhãrat consisting   of   Bhishma's 
teachings  from  his  bed  of arrows  to  Yudhishthir  after  the 
end of the Mahãbhãrat war. 
moliyu Rich  fabric  with  silky  finish  woven  with  golden  or  silver 
threads and detailed, decorative edges. 
mrudang Type     of     double-sided     drum.          Indian     percussion 
instrument  played  to  supply  rhythm  in  the  singing  of 
kirtans. 
mugdhã 1) Lowest. 
2) Used  to  describe  the gopis.    The mugdhã gopis would 
often  lecture Bhagvãn and  say, ‘We have gone out of 
our  way  doing  things  for  you,  yet  you  do  not  take  even 
the slightest notice of us’.  Furthermore,  if  they  were 
teased further, they would be upset with Bhagvãn, and 
speak such harsh words that a person  would feel they 
will soon fall from the path of Bhagvãn. 
mukta Free.  Released.  A liberated soul.  A resident of any dhãm 
of Bhagvãn who has been freed from life in the lower loks 
to  a  more  spiritually  elevated  state.    There  are  varying 
levels of muktas:  the muktas of Badrikãshram, Shvet-Dvip, 
Vaikunth,  and Golok.    The  highest  level  of mukta, akshar-
mukta,  has  attained  ultimate kalyãn and  is  free  from  the 
bondage  of Mãyã and  the  cycle  of  births  and  deaths.  
[Sãrangpur – 17]. 
mukti To  become  free.   Kalyãn.   Moksh.   Those  who  are bhaktas 
of Bhagvãn do  not  desire  any  of  the  four  types  of mukti:  
to reside in the dhãm of Bhagvãn; to stay near Bhagvãn; to 
assume a svarup similar to Bhagvãn; and to attain powers 
similar  to Bhagvãn.    A nishkãm bhakta of Bhagvãn does 
not  wish  for  any  of  these.    Instead,  he  only  wishes  for 
Bhagvãn’s sevã.  [Gadhadã I – 43]. 
Mul-Prakruti See Prakruti. 
Mul-Prakruti-
Purush 
See Prakruti-Purush. 
Mul-Purush See Purush. 

Glossary 
- 834 - 
mumukshu A person in search of moksh. 
muni Sãdhu. 
muni-mandal Group or assembly of munis. 
murti 1) Sacred  idol  of Bhagvãn used  to  offer  worship.    There 
are  eight  types  of murtis that  can  be   worshipped:  
stone,  wood,  metal,  earth,  engraved  or  drawn,  sand, 
gems, and mental. 
2) The form of Bhagvãn. 
  
N  
nãdi Nerve  or  channel  transmitting  energy  within  the  inner 
bodies   of   a   person   and   interconnecting   the chakras.  
There are said to be 72,000 nãdis in all, of which three are 
major:    the idã nãdi,  the pingalã nãdi,  and  the sushumnã 
nãdi. 
Naimishãranya 
Kshetra 
1) Wherever the jagged edges of the manomay chakra are 
worn  away.  A  person  should  understand  the  mind  to 
be  the manomay chakra,  and  the  ten indriyas to  be  its 
jagged  edges.    Wherever  those  jagged  edges  of  the 
mind (the indriyas) wear away and become blunt, that 
place   should   be   known   as Naimishãranya Kshetra.  
Religious   deeds   (jap, tap, vrat, dhyãn,   and pujã) 
commenced  in  that  place  flourish  rapidly,  day  by  day.  
Naimishãranya Kshetra should    be    known    to    be 
wherever Bhagvãn’s ekãntik sant resides. 
2) A tirth in India. 
naishtik  
brahm-chãri 
A  person  who  follows  the  eight  types  of brahm-chãrya, 
which  prevent  them  from  associating  with  the  opposite 
gender in the following ways: 
 shravanam - listening to or of 
 keertanam - talking to or of 
 keli - frolicking with 
 prekshanam - intentionally looking at 
 guhyabhãshanam - privately conversing with 
 sankalp - fantasising about 
 adhyavasãya - thinking of 
 kriyã - intercourse with 

Glossary 
- 835 - 
Nandishvar A white bull.  The vehicle of Shiv. 
napunsak Impotent.  Infertile.  Unable to procreate. 
Nãrad An avatãr of Bhagvãn.    He  incarnated  in  the svarup of  a 
travelling rushi.  Nãrad showed that bhakti is the best way 
of attaining moksh.  He was also a great bhakta of Bhagvãn 
and  has  guided  many  souls  on  the  path  of kalyãn by 
travelling all over the brahmãnd. 
Narak Where nãstiks and  sinners  are  sent  after  death  to  suffer 
for  their  sins  at  the  hands  of Yam-Rãj and  the yamduts.  
After suffering for their sins, these jeevs continue to go on 
the cycle of births and deaths.  Also called Yampuri.  
Nãrãyan The four-armed svarup of Bhagvãn. See Bhagvãn. 
Nãrãyan-Muni One  of  the  names  given  to  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  by  Rãmãnand 
Swãmi  at  the  time  of  His  initiation  as  the  head  of  the 
sampradãy.      The   other   name   given   was   Sahajãnand 
Swãmi. 
Nar-Nãrãyan An avatãr of Bhagvãn.  He incarnated in the svarup of twin 
brothers  to  kill  a  demon  named  Kunchi.   Nar incarnated 
as  Arjun,  and Nãrãyan incarnated  as Shree  Krishna.   Nar-
Nãrãyan Bhagvãn forever  performs tap in Badrikãshram 
for His bhaktas. 
nãstik 1) Atheist.    Non-believer.    Opposite  of ãstik.    Person  who 
does not believe in the existence of Bhagvãn, or who is 
not religious.  One of the four types of kusangis. 
2) Often refers specifically to the Jains, who propose that 
all  activities  and  events  are direct  results  of karmas, 
but  who  do  not  accept Bhagvãn as  the  all-doer  or  the 
giver of the rewards of karmas. 
3) A   person   who   states   that   the vidhi and nishedh 
prescribed by the shãstras are false. 
4) Can also describe people or shãstras that do not accept 
the authority and authenticity of the Veds, or a person 
who does not trust the  words of greats such as Nãrad, 
the Sanakãdik, Vyãs, and Vãlmiki. 
neti neti Indescribable.  Incomprehensible.  Beyond words. 
nididhyãs Constant   thinking   and   concentration.      Repeated   deep 

Glossary 
- 836 - 
thoughts.      After   having   mentally   retained   a   talk   with 
nishchay,  the  practice  of  continuously  recalling  the  talk 
day and night. 
nimish Blink.    Duration  of  time  equalling  approximately 
2
/
5
 of  a 
second.  The time taken to blink. 
nimit-pralay 1) Stimulated  dissolution.    Destruction  of  the  lower  ten 
loks of  the  fourteen  loks  of  a brahmãnd,  including 
Svarg-Lok,  Mrutyu-Lok  and  Pãtãl.    This  is  stimulated 
by  the  end  of  the  fourteen-manvantar day  of Virãt-
Purush, when his equally long night falls. 
2) Brahmã’s state  of sushupti (deep  sleep) – when  all  of 
ishvar’s responsibilities  are  absorbed – which  lasts  as 
long as his day.  Equivalent to 4.32 x 10
9
 human years. 
nindrã Sleep. 
nirãkãr Formless.  No svarup. 
niranjan Describes  a  person  whose  eyes  are  not  affected  by mãyã 
in the form of attractive objects. 
niranna-mukta A ‘food-less’ mukta.    The muktas of Shvet-Dvip are called 
niranna-muktas,  as  they  do  not  consume  water  (nir)  or 
food  (ann).    Also,  they  are  free  from  the shad-urmi (six 
physical  and  emotional  feelings).  The muktas that  reside 
in  this dhãm are ãtmãs who  have  been  freed  from  the 
cycle  of  births  and  deaths,  but  have   not  yet  attained 
Akshardhãm.  So, they perform continuous tap, in order to 
attain ultimate moksh. 
nirãvaran drashti The ability to see everywhere, like a siddh or yogi. 
nirbij Seedless.   Without the association of Bhagvãn. 
nirgun 1) Without gun.  Not possessing any qualities of the three 
guns of Mãyã – sattva-gun, rajo-gun,  and tamo-gun.  
Beyond all mãyik qualities.  Divine.  
2) Extremely subtle.  [Kãriyãni – 8]. 
nirlobhi Without greed. 
nirmãni Without pride. 
nirvikalp Without  alternatives  or  doubts.    Used  to  describe  faith  or 

Glossary 
- 837 - 
state in which a person sees only Bhagvãn – no doubts or 
distinctions remain whatsoever.  [Gadhadã I – 39]. 
nirvikalp samãdhi 1) Highest  state  of  realisation,  in  which  a  person  sees 
only Bhagvãn – no   doubts   or   distinctions   remain.  
[Gadhadã I – 39]. 
2) The eighth and final stage of ashtãng-yog. 
nirvishesh Description  of  that  which  is  without  any  responsibilities.  
This   describes Mãyã in   her   causal   state   when   she   is 
without  all  of  the  things  that  may  develop  from  her  (the 
twenty-four tattvas). 
nishchay Unfaltering  faith  in Bhagvãn,  no  matter  what is  seen  or 
heard. 
nishedh The “don’ts”. That which morally should not be done (in 
contrast to vidhi). 
nishkãm bhakta Superficially  appears  to  be  a sakãm bhakta,  but  inwardly, 
that bhakta has  perfect nishchay and  wishes  for  nothing 
except  the murti of Bhagvãn.    If  inner  enemies  cause 
disturbances  within,  or  a  desire  for  pleasures  other  than 
the murti of Bhagvãn arises, he feels intense guilt.  Even if 
he has only a slight amount of ãtmã-nishthã and vairãgya, 
such  a bhakta still  attains  profound  bliss  in the dhãm of 
Bhagvãn after leaving his body. 
nishkãmi Without lust. 
nishthã Belief. 
nisnehi Without affection. 
nispruhi Without desire for worldly objects. 
nisvãd No desire for tasty foods. 
nitya-pralay 1) Constant    destruction.        The    day-to-day    dying    of 
countless  individual devs,  demons,  humans  and  other 
beings. 
2) The jeev’s state of sushupti (deep  sleep) – when  all  of 
jeev’s responsibilities are absorbed. 
nivrutti 1) Inactivity.        State    of    quietness    and    obedience.  
Retirement   from   social   duties   and   affairs.      In   this 

Glossary 
- 838 - 
sense, often used to refer to the path of tyãg.  
2) Can also include retirement from all forms of activities 
and responsibilities, including religious activities, such 
as sevã in  the mandir,  and  attending  to bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn.  A person increases dhyãn and smaran at the 
expense of bhakti and sevã. 
niyam 1) Moral  and  spiritual  disciplines  and  religious  codes  of 
conduct  prescribed   by Bhagvãn or  the shãstras, to 
protect a bhakta on the path to Bhagvãn.  Niyams may 
relate  to  either dharma or bhakti.   Niyams keep  the 
bhakta fit  to  travel  closer  to Bhagvãn and  ultimately 
earn  the  grace  of Bhagvãn.    Disobeying niyams causes 
the bhakta to  fall  from  the  path  of Bhagvãn.    Basic 
niyams for bhaktas are outlined in the Shikshãpatri. 
2) The  second  step  of ashtãng-yog,  which  involves  the 
observance  of  religious  practices  and  code  of dharma 
for the control and refinement of the mind. 
Nrusinh An avatãr of Bhagvãn.    He  incarnated  in  the svarup of  a 
lion-man.        Hiranyakashipu    was    a    demon    who   had 
immunity  from  being  killed  by  man,  beast,  and Bhagvãn.  
For,  this  reason, Bhagvãn took  birth  as  half-lion  and  half-
man.    He  killed  Hiranyakashipu,  and  saved  His  devout 
bhakta, Prahlãd. 
  
P  
pachhedi A thin shawl. 
pãd Feet.  Physical organ of walking (one of the indriyas). 
pãdma Lotus.  The chihn of a lotus on the palm is called a padma.  
Also, a lotus held in the hand is called a padma. 
pãdma-kalp Period   of   time   during   the   process   of   creation   when 
Marichi   and   others jeevs   are   given   their   bodies   by 
Bhagvãn.    Length  of pãdma-kalp time  is  one  of Brahmã's 
days (4.32 x 10
9
 human years).  [Gadhadã – 13]. 
pãgh Turban. Long, thin piece of cloth tied around the head. 
pakhvãj Type    of mrudang or    double-sided    drum.        Indian 

Glossary 
- 839 - 
percussion instrument with a deep, mellow sound, played 
to supply rhythm in the singing of kirtans. 
paksh To  be  in  favour  of  someone.    Loyalty.    We  must  always 
take the paksh of Bhagvãn and His bhaktas. 
pal Duration of time equalling approximately 24 seconds. 
pãlkhi Palanquin. A   covered   seat   carried   on   poles   on   the 
shoulders of four or more people. 
panch Five.  
panch-amrut Nectar  of  five.    A  mixture  of  five  items,  used  in pujãs and 
abhishek.:  milk, yoghurt, ghee, honey, and sugar. 
panch-vishay The   five   types   of   objects   that   are   perceived   by   the 
indriyas:   shabda (sounds), sparsh (touches), rup (sights), 
ras (tastes), and gandh (smells). 
pandit Priest. 
pãni Hands.  Physical organ of handling objects. 
parã The divine sound produced in the navel of Virãt-Purush is 
known as the ‘parã’ speech.      For  the  purpose  of  creating 
the Veds, Bhagvãn Himself has inspired that ‘parã’ speech.  
[Sãrangpur – 6]  
pãrãk-kruchhra Form   of   harsh tap which   involves   fasting   for   twelve 
continuous days. 
Paramãtmã Greater  than  the ãtmã.    God.    Supreme  being.   Bhagvãn.  
Lord  of  all.    He  is  unparalleled,  omnipotent  and  the  all-
doer,  omniscient,  omnipresent,  the  ocean  of  all  forms  of 
bliss, does not have any attributes of Mãyã, divine, always 
taking  birth  on  earth  for  His bhaktas.    Resides  within  the 
ãtmã. 
param-bhãgvat Ideal bhakta of Bhagvãn, referring to a sat-purush or sant. 
param-ekãntik sant Ideal ekãntik sãdhu of Bhagvãn,  referring  to  a sat-purush 
or sant. 
Parameshvar See Bhagvãn. 
paramhans 1) Supreme  swan.    A  male sãdhu of  the  highest  order, 

Glossary 
- 840 - 
characterised  by  his  ability  to  discriminate  between 
sat and asat – just   as   swans   were   traditionally 
considered  to  be  able  to   distinguish  between  milk 
mixed with water. 
2) Traditionally,   they   do   not   only   abandon   worldly 
activities,  but  also  all  religious  accessories  such  as 
rites, symbols and objects – pujã, chãndlo, kanthi – and 
lead  a  life  of  travelling  and  preaching.    In  the  time  of 
Swãminãrãyan  Bhagvãn,  there  were  2,000  educated, 
talented   and   devout sãdhus of   which   500   were 
initiated  as paramhans.    These  were  later  re-initiated 
as sãdhus and    had    returned    to    performing    all 
traditional  religious  rites  and  rituals,  but  were  still 
known as paramhans. 
Parampad See Akshardhãm. 
parãrdhs Duration of time equalling 1 x 10
17
 human years. 
pãrasmani Alchemist’s stone.  Magical gem that turns iron into gold. 
Parbrahm Beyond Brahm.    God.    Supreme  being.   Bhagvãn.    He  is 
unparalleled,   omnipotent   and   the   all-doer,   omniscient, 
omnipresent, the ocean of all forms of bliss, does not have 
any  attributes  of Mãyã,  divine,  always  taking  birth  on 
earth  for  His bhaktas.    Resides  within  the ãtmã.    Also 
called Paramãtmã, Parbrahm, Krishna Nãrãyan,    and 
Swãminãrãyan. 
Highest of the five eternal entities (jeev, ishvar, Mãyã, and 
Brahm, and Parbrahm). 
pãrshad 1) Male tyãgi in   the   time   of Swãminãrãyan   Bhagvãn, 
similar  to  a sãdhu,  but  whose niyams were  not  as 
strict;   they   observed brahm-chãrya in   general   but 
were allowed to talk with women, and were allowed to 
touch  money  but  not  keep  it  for  themselves.    Most 
pãrshads shaved  their  heads  like  other sãdhus but 
wore a white dhoti and upper garment. 
2) Attendant of Bhagvãn. 
Parshurãm An avatãr of Bhagvãn.    He  incarnated  in  the svarup of  a 
brave  warrior.  Parshurãm had  great  devotion  for  His 
parents.      However,   His   father   was   hot-tempered, and 
Parshurãm inherited  this  quality  from  him.    Then,  His 

Glossary 
- 841 - 
father  was killed by Kartavirya Rãjã.  As Kartavirya was a 
kshatriya, Parshurãm vowed  to  kill  all  the kshatriyas on 
this earth.  So, He saved the earth from the tyranny of the 
kshatriyas and destroyed all the kings who were harassing 
the  people.  However, Parshurãm became  proud  of  his 
power.    As  He terrorised  the kshatriyas,  they  all  fled  and 
no  one  remained  to  protect  this  earth.    So,  Kashyap  Muni 
called  them  back  and  ordered Parshurãm to  leave  this 
world. 
Pãrvati Wife  of Shiv.    Mother  of Ganpati.    In  her  previous  life,  she 
was called Sati, and was married to Shiv.  However, as she 
had  vowed  to  always  be  married  to Shiv,  when  she  was 
reincarnated as Pãrvati, she again married Shiv.  
pashyanti When  the  ‘parã’ speech   reached   the hruday-ãkãsh of 
Virãt-Purush, it became known by the name of ‘pashyanti’. 
pati vratã A faithful wife.  A wife who observes the vow of fidelity is 
called  a pati  vratã.      A  true pati  vratã possesses  great 
powers, and even Bhagvãn must obey her wishes. 
patit-pãvan The rescuer of the fallen and the wretched. 
pãyu Anus.  Physical organ of excretion (one of the indriyas). 
pingalã nãdi Nerve   or   channel   of   a   masculine   nature   transmitting 
intellectual  and  mental  energy  within  the  inner  body  of  a 
person,  where  the  current  of  energy  flows  upward  and 
ends on the right side of the body.  One of the three major 
nãdis. 
Posh Seventh   month   of   the Ãshãdhi   Samvat year,   normally 
falling between December and January. 
pradakshinã Look   from   all   directions.   To   walk   in   the   clockwise 
direction  around  the murti of Bhagvãn with  a  focused 
mind, and receive His darshan from all directions.  A form 
of bhakti, signifying  that Bhagvãn is  the  centre  of  our 
lives;  just  as  the  sun  provide  energy  for  the  planets  that 
orbit it, Bhagvãn provides energy for us. The pradakshinã 
is performed in a clockwise direction so Bhagvãn remains 
on our right, which is the position of the master.  
Pradhãn Pradhãn-Prakruti. 

Glossary 
- 842 - 
Pradhãn-Prakruti Prakruti half  of  the Pradhãn-Purush pair, ‘conceived’ by 
Mul-Purush and Mul-Prakruti for    the    creation    and 
sustenance    of    each brahmãnd.        Also    called    simply 
Pradhãn. 
Pradhãn-Purush One of the countless pairs of Pradhãn-Prakruti and Purush 
‘conceived’  by Mul-Purush and Mul-Prakruti for   the 
creation and sustenance of each brahmãnd.  Subsequently, 
from each pair of Pradhãn-Purush, the twenty-four tattvas 
are created, and in turn, the jeevs and ishvars receive their 
respective bodies. 
Pradyumna One  of the  four  forms  of Bhagvãn’s Vishvarup svarup.    His 
role  is  to  explain  the tattvas,  and  to  cause  the  sustenance 
of   the brahmãnd (Virãt-Purush).      During   the   state   of 
sustenance, Virãt-Purush worships Pradyumna. 
prãgna Name  of  the jeevãtmã in  the sushupti state,  when  it  is 
conscious of its kãran body.  [Sãrangpur - 6] 
prajãpati The  maker  of  clay  and  mud  pots.    The devs that  preside 
over   procreation,   and   protect   life.  Brahmã,   Marichi, 
Daksh,  and  Kashyap  are  known  as prajãpatis,  as  they  are 
involved in creating life-forms and the world. 
prakruti Refers to chaitanya prakruti and/or jad prakruti. 
Prakruti 1) Divine  energy  or  instrument  of Bhagvãn that  initiates 
the creation process by being ‘impregnated’ by Purush 
– also   called Mul-Purush, Mahã-Purush,   or Akshar-
Purush – and  from  which  countless  pairs  of Pradhãn 
and Purush are  ‘conceived’  for  the  creation  and 
sustenance of each brahmãnd.  Taken to be feminine in 
nature,  she  is  composed  of  the  three gun,  is  both jad 
and chaitanya,  eternal, nirvishesh,  and  in  her  dormant 
state houses all jeevs and all elements. Also called Mul-
Prakruti, Mul-Mãyã, and Mahã-Mãyã.  
2) Also refers to Pradhãn-Prakruti. 
Prakruti-Purush The   pair   of Mul-Prakruti and Mul-Purush,   from   which 
countless pairs of Pradhãn and Purush are formed for the 
creation  and  sustenance  of  each brahmãnd.    Also  called 
Mul-Prakruti-Purush. 
prãkrut-pralay General  destruction.    Destruction  of  the  body  of Virãt-

Glossary 
- 843 - 
Purush (all   fourteen   loks   of   one brahmãnd,   and   the 
absorption    of Pradhãn-Purush and    the    twenty-four 
tattvas, including maha-tattva,   into Mahã-Mãyã (Mul-
Prakruti).    This  occurs  when  the  two-parãrdh lifespan  of 
Virãt-Purush has elapsed. 
pralay Destruction. 
prãn 
  
  
A vital air.  Breath.  Life force or energy flowing within the 
primary   life-currents   of   the   body,   called vãyu,   which 
control  crucial  bodily  functions.     There  are  five   main 
vãyus: 
 prãn – forward moving air 
 apãn – air that moves away 
 samãn – balancing air 
 udãn – ascending air 
 vyãn – outward moving air 
pranav A    transformed    form    of    the    divine,    transcendental 
vibration  emanated  at  the  moment  of  first  creation,  and 
from  which  all  other  sounds,  and  ultimately  the  sacred 
Veds, come forth.  The speech of Virãt-Purush became the 
form  of pranav by becoming the three sounds of ‘A’, ‘U’, 
and ‘M’, and then became the fifty-two syllables, and took 
the form of the four Veds.  The three-syllable – ‘A’, ‘U’ and 
‘M’ – sound known as AUM.  
prãnãyãm Controlling  the prãns.    Fourth  step  of ashtãng-yog,  which 
involves  controlling  of prãns through  breathing  exercises 
leading  to  the  calming  of  the chitt in  preparation  for 
concentration. 
prãrabdha Fate.  Destiny. 
prãrabdha karma Deeds  whose  consequences  are  already  set  in  motion.  
The  portion  of  the  stock  of karmas (sanchit karmas)  that 
are  presently  giving  rewards,  based  on  the  principle  of 
past   deeds   shaping   present   events.      The prãrabdha 
karmas influence  the  nature  of  a  person’s  body  and 
associations, prevailing circumstances, and  even  personal 
strengths. 
prasãd Food that has been  blessed  and sanctified after offering it 
to Bhagvãn.  

Glossary 
- 844 - 
pratham First. 
pratyãhãr Withdrawal of sensory inputs into the physical body, that 
enters  through  the  five  sense  organs.  The  fifth  step  of 
ashtãng-yog. 
pratyaksha Visible.  Present on earth.  Physical. 
praudhã 1) Highest.  Best. 
2) Used  to  describe  the gopis.    The praudhã gopis would 
do only that which pleases Bhagvãn.  In no way would 
they    use    any    cunning    methods    to    satisfy    their 
selfishness.         Their   only   wish   would   be   to   please 
Bhagvãn.        Therefore,    they    remain    happy    with 
whatever  pleases Bhagvãn.    Also,  they  would  never 
become angry at, or jealous of the other gopis who are 
equal   to   them.      They   would   also   abandon   vicious 
natures,  such  as mãn and matsar,  and  remain  alert  in 
the sevã of Bhagvãn.    They  would  never  do  anything 
that would displease Bhagvãn. 
pravrutti 1) Activity in the form of social duties and affairs.  In this 
sense, often used to refer to the path of a grahastha. 
2) Can     also     include     all     forms     of     activities     and 
responsibilities,  including religious  activities,  such  as 
sevã in   the mandir,   and   attending   to bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn.    A  person  increases bhakti and sevã rather 
than dhyãn and smaran. 
prãyshchit Penance.  Atonement. 
prem-lakshanã 
bhakti 
Profound, loving devotion. 
Pruthu An avatãr of Bhagvãn.    He  incarnated  in  the svarup of  a 
king  as  it  was  the  wish  of  the rushis.   The  earth  had 
concealed all vegetation within herself and as a result the 
whole  land  had  become  barren.   Pruthu returned  all  the 
vegetation  to  earth, and  made  the  world  beautiful  and 
attractive again.  
Pruthvi The devi of  the  earth.    Mother  Earth.    She  is  a svarup of 
Lakshmi. 
pruthvi Earth.    One  of  the  five bhuts,  from  which  the  physical 

Glossary 
- 845 - 
world  (Virãt-Purush)  is  formed.    It  supports  all jeevs,  and 
in the form of a physical body, the pruthvi is their home.  It 
separates the  other  four bhuts,  and  gives  a  physical  form 
to all life-forms. 
Punam Full  moon.    The  15th  day  of  the  light  half  of  an  Indian 
calendar month. 
Purãn Ancient.    A  set  of  eighteen shãstras recording  ancient 
Hindu    events    that   incorporate    ethical    and spiritual 
teachings, most popular of which is the Shreemad Bhãgvat 
Purãn.    The  other  seventeen  Purãns  are,  namely:    the 
Brahma  Purãn,  Padma  Purãn,  Vishnu  Purãn,    Vãyu  Purãn, 
Nãrad  Purãn,  Mãrkandey  Purãn,  Agney  Purãn,  Bhavishya 
Purãn,  Brahma-Vaivart  Purãn, Ling  Purãn,  Varãh  Purãn, 
Skand  Purãn,  Vãman  Purãn,  Kurma  Purãn,  Matsya  Purãn, 
Garud  Purãn,  and  Brahmãnd  Purãn.    Forms  a  portion  of 
the Smruti. 
Purush 1) An akshar-mukta selected    by Akshar-Brahm to 
‘impregnate’ Prakruti for  the  creation  process,  from 
which   countless   pairs   of Pradhãn and Purush are 
formed   for   the   creation   and   sustenance   of   each 
brahmãnd. 
2) Purush half of the Pradhãn-Purush pair, ‘conceived’ by 
Mul-Purush and Mul-Prakruti for   the   creation   and 
sustenance of each brahmãnd. 
3) Taken   to   be   masculine   in   nature, Purush is   the 
controller of Prakruti, and is also distinct from her.  He 
is indivisible, without a beginning, and without an end.  
He  is  self-luminous,  omniscient,  imperishable, satya, 
kshetragna,  and  the  cause  of  all  the  activities  that 
possess a form.  He also has a divya body. 
4) Also    called Mahã-Purush, Mul-Purush or Akshar-
Purush. 
purushãrths Collective  term  for  the  four  goals  pursued  by  all  Hindus:  
dharma (duties), arth (material  wealth), kãm (desires), 
and moksh (liberation).  [Amdãvãd – 5]. 
Purushottam God.      Supreme   being.    Bhagvãn.      He   is   unparalleled, 
omnipotent  and  the  all-doer,  omniscient,   omnipresent, 
the   ocean   of   all   forms   of   bliss,   does   not   have   any 
attributes of Mãyã, divine, always taking birth on earth for 

Glossary 
- 846 - 
His bhaktas.      Resides   within   the ãtmã.      Also   called 
Parbrahm, Paramãtmã, Krishna Nãrãyan, and 
Swãminãrãyan. 
purush-prayatna If  a  person  keeps  the  company  of  a  devout sãdhu and 
becomes  virtuous  through  his  own  thoughts,  then  that is 
known as purush-prayatna. 
  
R  
Rãdhã/Rãdhikã A sevak of Shree Krishna.  She eternally performs His sevã 
in Akshardhãm. 
rajãi A thick blanket. 
rãjarshi A  householder  or  royal  person  with  characteristics  like 
that of a rushi.  At a lower level than a brahmarshi. 
rãjas-ahankãr One of the three types of ahankãr that evolve from maha-
tattva and  from  which,  the  ten indriyas,  the buddhi,  and 
the prãns evolve. 
rãjasi Relating to rajo-gun.  Full of rajo-gun. 
rajo-gun  Quality   of   passion.      One   of   the   three gun of Mãyã 
(Prakruti)  characterised  by  incoherence  and  desires  for 
the  vishays.    When rajo-gun prevails,  the antah-karan 
becomes     polluted     and     many     disturbing     thoughts 
regarding  desires  for  the vishays arise,  making  it difficult 
to   worship Bhagvãn’s murti.      Also,   when rajo-gun is 
predominant,  the  rewards  of  any karmas performed  by  a 
jeev are  experienced  in  the svapna state.    The  products  of 
rajo-gun include   lust,   and   desires   for   enjoying   sense 
pleasures.  [Kãriyãni – 1] [Gadhadã II – 43]. 
Rãjput Son  of  the  king.    A  class  of  people  of  the kshatriya varna 
descending  originally  from  royal  lineage,  and  extremely 
strong and brave. 
rãkhadi A   decorative,   strand-like   bracelet   traditionally   tied   by 
sisters  on  their  brothers hands  on  the  day  of  Rakshã-
Bandhan (Shrãvan sud Punam) affirming their loving bond 
between each other, and in particular, the brother’s vow 
to protect his sister. 

Glossary 
- 847 - 
Rãm/Rãmchandra An avatãr of Bhagvãn.    He  incarnated  in  the svarup of  a 
king.  Shree Rãm was  the  perfect  human,  the  perfect  son, 
the  perfect  husband,  and  the  perfect  king.  He  was  exiled 
to  the  forest  for  fourteen  years,  with  His  wife Sitãji and 
His  brother  Lakshmanji.    When Sitãji was  kidnapped  by 
the   demon   Rãvan, Rãm saved   her   with   the   help of 
Hanumãnji and Lakshmanji, and killed Rãvan. 
Rãmãyan The  story  of Rãm.    A shãstra narrating  the  story  of Shree 
Rãm Bhagvãn,  which  includes  His  14-year  exile  from  the 
throne  of  Ayodhyã  to  the  forest; Sitã’s abduction  by  the 
evil demon Rãvan; Rãm’s ultimate victory over Rãvan and 
his armies; and the return of Rãm and Sitã to Ayodhyã.  It 
contains principles for society through the characteristics 
exhibited by Rãm, Sitã, Lakshmanji, and Bharatji. 
Rãmnavmi Birthday  of Shree Rãm – Chaitra sud 9.  A  fast  if  kept  on 
this  day,  and  it  is  celebrated  with  great  festivity.  Also  the 
birthday of Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn. 
ras A  taste.    One  of  the panch-vishays.    It  is  the  physical 
element   of jal,   and   is   perceived   by   the   tongue.      The 
characteristics of ras are sweetness, spiciness, 
distastefulness, bitterness, sourness, and saltiness. 
rãs Traditional  Indian  folkdance  normally  played  between  a 
collection of partners, each partner having a pair of sticks 
to strike in accompaniment to the music while singing and 
dancing in a circular motion. 
rasik Loving. Affectionate. Romantic. [Gadhadã – 26]. 
rãs-leelã The  divine rãs episode  of Shree Krishna with  the gopis of 
Vraj,  which  is  narrated  in  the  chapters  29-33  in  the  tenth 
skandh of   Shreemad   Bhãgvat.      Also   called rãs-panch-
ãdhyãyi. 
rasnã Tongue.  Physical organ of taste (one of the indriyas). 
rath Chariot. 
reto Feto, moliyu or shelu with  silky,  decorative  edges  woven 
with  golden  or  silver  threads.    Tied  around  the  head  or 
waist, or left to rest upon the shoulders. 

Glossary 
- 848 - 
rotlo A   basic   unleavened   bread-like   food   of   many   parts   of 
Gujarat made generally of millet flour that is patted into a 
flat,  circular  shape  before  being  cooked  on  an  earthen  or 
metal hot plate. 
Rudra A svarup of Shiv.  The dev of the ahankãr. 
rup A  sight.    One  of  the panch-vishays.   Rup is  the  physical 
element  of tej,  and  is  perceived  by  the  eyes.   Rup reveals 
the appearance of all objects, and resides in all objects in a 
small form, and changes as objects change. 
rup-choki A platform on the side of a set of stairs. 
Rushabh-Dev An avatãr of Bhagvãn.    He  incarnated  in  the svarup of  a 
king who became a tyãgi.  He abandoned his kingdom and 
one hundred sons. 
rushi A sage.  A tyãgi who performs severe tap and dhyãn.   The 
Veds were revealed by Brahmã to rushis. 
S  
sabhã Assembly.   A   group   of satsangis listening   to kathã or 
singing kirtans. 
sachidanand Eternal (sach), all-knowing (chid), and blissful (ãnãnd). 
sadguru A great sant.  
sãdhan-dashã A  person  in  the  process  of  attaining siddh-dashã.    Has 
attained    the    state    of brahm.        He    identifies    things 
separately; pleasant and unpleasant vishays do not appear 
to be equal. 
sãdhu Male  person  who  has  abandoned  worldly  duties  and  has 
chosen a strict life of religious activities under strict vows 
of poverty, brahm-chãrya, and obedience.  A tyãgi. 
sãfo A pãgh with one end hanging at the back or the side of the 
head. 
sagun With gun.  Possessing divine qualities and kalyãn-kãri gun. 
Also   means   great,   when   referring   to   the svarup of 
Bhagvãn. 

Glossary 
- 849 - 
sakãm bhakta A bhakta who  superficially  appears  to  be  a tyãgi and 
nishkãmi.    However,  he  does  not  have  wish  for  the murti 
of Bhagvãn,  but instead has desires for the darshan of the 
ãtmã and  the  four  types  of mukti.    Even  if  his nishchay is 
perfect,  is  a  great tyãgi, has  firm vairãgya,  intense ãtmã-
nishthã,  and  he  is  not  disturbed  by  inner  enemies,  if  he 
desires   anything   other   than   the pratyaksha svarup of 
Bhagvãn,  then  even  if  he  is  in  the  higher loks,  he  will 
certainly attain less bliss. 
sãkar Large sugar crystals. 
sãkshãtkãr When  that  talk  is  recalled  exactly  as  it  was,  with  absolute 
clarity  and  sincerity.    If  a  person  engages  in shravan, 
manan,  and nididhyãs about  the Bhagvãn and  His svarup 
of  the ãtmã,  then  he  will  attain sãkshãtkãr of  the ãtmã.  
Sãkshãtkãr cannot  be  attained  by  doing shravan alone, 
without  practicing  both manan and nididhyãs.  Also  used 
to  describe  something  that  has  been  so  well  learned  or 
understood that it becomes second nature. 
samãdhi 1) Trance.    A  spiritual  experience,  usually  of Bhagvãn or 
His dhãm,  in which  consciousness  of  the  body  and 
surroundings is lost. 
2) Eighth    and    final    step   of ashtãng-yog.        Spiritual 
experience   of   union   with Bhagvãn,   which   is   the 
highest level of yog. 
sampradãy Sect.  Fellowship. 
samudra manthan Churning  of  the  ocean.    The devs decided  to  churn  the 
ocean for precious gifts and amrut.  However, they needed 
the  demons  to  help  them  churn  the  ocean.    The devs 
offered   half   of   the amrut to the   demons,   and   they 
accepted.  First, they tore up Mount Mandarãnchal for use 
as  a  churning  stick.    Then,  a  serpent  named  Vasuki  was 
used  as  a  churning  rope.    The devs took  hold  of  the  tail, 
and the demons held the head.  While they were churning, 
Vasuki’s breath became very hot, which almost suffocated 
the  demons.   Bhagvãn then  took  the avatãr of Kurma to 
stop   the   mountain   from   sinking   into   the   ocean   bed.  
Finally, the ocean produced precious items: poison, a cow, 
a  horse,  a  white  elephant,  a  diamond,  a  wishing  tree,  an 
apsãrã,  alcohol, Lakshmi, Chandra, Surya,  a  jewel,  a  conch 

Glossary 
- 850 - 
shell,   and   a   bow.    Shiv swallowed   the   poison,   which 
caused   his   throat   to   turn   blue.      Finally, Dhanvantari 
(avatãr of Bhagvãn)  emerged  from  the  ocean,  holding  an 
urn  of amrut.   The devs and  demons  fought  over  the 
amrut.    However, Bhagvãn did  not  want  the  demons  to 
obtain   it   as   it   would   give   them   immortality.      So,   He 
assumed the avatãr of Mohini to distract the demons. 
Samvat The calendar established by Indian emperor 
Vikramaditya of Ujjain following his victory 56 BCE.  It is a 
lunar  calendar  based  on  ancient Hindu tradition.    The 
Vikram  Samvat  calendar  is  56.7  years  ahead  of  the  solar 
Gregorian calendar.  The calendar most commonly used is 
the Kãrtiki Samvat, which begins on the first day of Kãrtik.  
However,  the  Vachanãmrut  is  written  using  the Ashãdhi 
Samvat, which begins on the first day of Ãshãdh.  
Sanakãdik An avatãr of Bhagvãn.   He incarnated in  the svarup of the 
four   sons   of Brahmã: Sanak, Sanãtan, Sanandan,   and 
Sanat-Kumãr.  Born  from Brahmã's mind,  the  four  sons 
are described as great rushis who undertook lifelong vows 
of brahm-chãrya against  the  wishes  of their  father.    From 
the Sanakãdik, the brãhmans got the inspiration regarding 
the   values   and   importance   of tap and brahm-chãrya.  
Although  they  are  eternally  liberated  souls  from  birth, 
they  still  became  attracted  to  the  devotional  service  of 
Bhagvãn.  Despite being very senior in age, the Sanakãdik 
are  said  to  wander  the  universe  in  the  forms  of  small 
children.  Also called Chãtur Kumãr or Kumãr San. 
sanchit karma Accumulated  deeds.    Immeasurable  stock  of  all  deeds 
performed,  in  infinite  past  lives  and  in  the  present  life.  
The karmas are   retained  in  the kãran body  until  the 
karmas ‘ripen’ to eventually give rewards as prãrabdha 
karmas,  either  later  in  the  present  life  or  in  a  future  life.  
[Vadtãl – 6]. 
sandhyã 1) Evening. 
2) The forth ãrti of the day, performed in the evening. 
sang  
(pronounced sung) 
Company.  Association. 
Sankarshan One  of the  four  forms  of Bhagvãn’s Vishvarup svarup.    His 

Glossary 
- 851 - 
role  is  to  teach  spiritual  knowledge,  and  to  cause  the 
destruction   the brahmãnd (Virãt-Purush).      During   the 
state of destruction, Virãt-Purush worships Sankarshan. 
Sãnkhya A  philosophy  that  analyses  the tattvas,  and  states  that 
there are twenty-five tattva.  Founded by Kapil-Dev. 
sãnkhya Fundamental    belief   of   the    Sãnkhya    philosophy.        It 
proposes that all that evolves from Mãyã is perishable and 
vain.    After  developing  thoughts  of sãnkhya,  the bhakta 
gradually  becomes  detached  from  worldly, mãyik objects 
and become further absorbed in Bhagvãn. 
sãnkhya-yogi A yogi who  has  abandoned  activities.    Term  used  for  a 
bhakta who  has  abandoned  his/her  worldly  duties – as 
opposed  to  a karma-yogi – and  is  sincerely  striving  for 
kalyãn.    Refers  to  a tyãgi who  is  totally  dedicated  and 
committed   to satsang.      In   the   time   of Swãminãrãyan 
Bhagvãn,  many  widows  and  widowers  chose  to  become 
sãnkhya-yogis after   their   spouse   passed   away.      They 
dedicated  their  lives  to Bhagvãn rather  than  any  other 
family members.  Often refers to female tyãgis. 
sannyãs ãshram Last of the four stages of life, when a person abandons all 
worldly duties and lives as a tyãgi. 
sannyãsi Person who has abandoned all worldly duties and is living 
as a tyãgi. 
sanshay Curiosity.  When questions arise in the mind. 
sanskãr Impression.      Refers   to   the   pleasant   and   unpleasant 
impression  of  a karma performed  earlier  in  the  present 
life  or  in  a  previous  life.    It  is  imprinted  and  accumulated 
in  the kãran body.    This  impression  in  turn  influences 
actions  and  achievements   in  the   present  and/or  later 
lives. 
sant A sãdhu.    A tyãgi.  In  the  Vachanãmrut, sant refers  to sat-
purush. 
sãrangi An Indian stringed musical instrument played by stroking 
the strings with a bow and depressing strings on a fretted 
neck.  Of all Indian instruments, it is said to most resemble 
the sound of the human voice. 

Glossary 
- 852 - 
Sarasvati The devi of knowledge. 
sarodã An Indian stringed musical instrument played by plucking 
with a plectrum and depressing strings on a fretless neck. 
sarvagna The power to see the creation of brahmãnds. 
sarvopari The lord of all. 
sat 1) True. Real. 
2) Permanent, imperishable and unchanging.  Is unbound 
by the past, the present, and the future. 
satãr Indian  stringed  musical  instrument  played  by  striking 
with  a  wire  plectrum  and  depressing  strings  on  a  fretted 
neck.  Similar to a sitãr. 
sãthvo A mixture of different types of roasted flour, which is then 
mixed with salt and water. 
sati A widow who, out of her total dedication and commitment 
to her husband, voluntary kills herself by throwing herself 
on her dead husband’s burning funeral pyre. 
sat-purush A  true sant.    A sant who  guides  a  person  on  the  path  of 
Bhagvãn.  A guru for   a mumukshu.      Through   whom 
Bhagvãn remains  ever-manifest,  passing  on  His  divine 
energy and experience, love and guidance to all beings on 
earth.    They  ensure  that  the  gateway  to  liberation  and 
Bhagvãn is forever open for all seekers.  Surrendering to a 
sat-purush, and striving to obey his ãgnã, is the root of all 
spiritual   activities.      Also   called sant, bhakta, ekãntik 
bhakta, ekãntik sant, param-bhãgvat, param-ekãntik sant, 
and sadguru. 
satsang 1) True   company.    The   practice   of   associating   with 
Bhagvãn’s sant,   other satsangis,   the ãtmã,   and   the 
sacred shãstras,   and   also   observing vartmãns and 
niyams. 
2) Also refers to  the sampradãy, which is the presence of 
good company. 
satsangi A person who practises satsang. 
sattva-gun Quality   of   goodness.      One   of   the   three gun of Mãyã 
(Prakruti)    characterised   by    awareness    and vairãgya 

Glossary 
- 853 - 
towards the vishays.  When sattva-gun prevails, the antah-
karan is   pure,   and   a   person   can   pleasantly   worship 
Bhagvãn’s murti.    Also,  when sattva-gun is  predominant, 
the   rewards   of   any karmas performed   by   a jeev are 
experienced  during  the jãgrat state.    The  products  of 
sattva-gun include   happiness, gnãn, vairãgya,   wisdom, 
tranquillity, and tap.  [Kãriyãni – 1] [Gadhadã II – 43]. 
sãttvik Relating to sattva-gun.  Full of sattva-gun. 
sãttvik-ahankãr One of the three types of ahankãr that evolve from maha-
tattva, and from which the man, and the presiding devs of 
the indriyas evolve. 
satya Truth. 
Satya-Yug First  of  the  four yugs that  mark  the  time-scale  of  the 
world.    Lasting  1,728,000  human  years,  it  is  the  purest 
and  most  righteous  of  the yugs,  where  people  lived  to  be 
100,000,   all   were brãhmans,  everyone’s  wishes  were 
fulfilled, and everyone worshipped Bhagvãn. 
savikalp With alternatives or doubts.  Used to describe the state in 
which   a   person   sees Bhagvãn,   but   with   doubts   or 
distinctions still remaining in his mind – in contrast to the 
nirvikalp state,  in  which  no  distinctions  remain  and  a 
person sees only Bhagvãn. [Gadhadã I – 39]. 
savikalp samãdhi A state of realisation, in which a person sees Bhagvãn but 
doubts   or   distinctions   still   remain – in   contrast   to 
nirvikalp samãdhi,  in  which  no  distinctions  remain  and  a 
person sees only Bhagvãn.  [Gadhadã I – 39]. 
sevak Servant of Bhagvãn. 
sevati Flower  of  the  chrysanthemum  genus,  found  to  blossom 
unusually out of season. Also known as guldãvadi. 
shabda A sound.  One of the panch-vishays.  Shabda is the physical 
element of ãkãsh, and  is perceived by the  ears.   Shabda is 
indicator of all objects, the cause of all social interactions, 
and reveals the nature and class of the speaker. 
shad-urmi The  six  physical  and  emotional  feelings:  thirst,  hunger, 
grief, infatuation, old age, and death. 

Glossary 
- 854 - 
shakti-panthi Follower  of  a  Shakti  cult.      They  worship  Shakti,  as  the 
governing   power   of   the   world,   and   they   believe   the 
consumption of meat and alcohol to be holy.  Animals are 
sacrificed in front of a murti Shakti, and offered as prasãd.  
One of the four types of kusangis. 
shãligrãm A   small   sacred   stone   (usually   black)   worshipped   by 
Vaishnavs as a form of Vishnu.  Found in the waters of the 
River Gandki, flowing through the foothills of Tibet, which 
is  considered  especially  sacred  because  of  the  numerous 
rushis who performed tap on her banks. 
shankh Conch shell. 
sharabh A  legendary  beast  thought  to  be  fiercer  than  a  lion,  and 
which roams in the Himalayas. 
Shãradã A svarup of Pãrvati. 
sharir 1) Embodiment.    That  which  is  pervaded,  inspired  and 
governed by the ãtmã. 
2) Refers  to  the  physical  and  non-physical  world,  which 
is  pervaded,  inspired,  and  governed  by Bhagvãn,  its 
shariri. 
shariri 1) That   which   is   embodied.      That   which   pervades, 
inspires and governs the sharir. 
2) Refers    to Bhagvãn,    who    pervades,    inspires,    and 
governs   the   physical   and   non-physical   world,   His 
sharir. 
shãstra Religious and scared scripture. 
shat-sampatti The   six   spiritual   activities   prescribed   by   the   Sãnkhya 
philosophy:  
 sham (tranquillity) 
 dam (self-control; restraint of sense organs) 
 uparati  (abstinence;  refraining  from  mundane  objects 
and activities) 
 titikshã (endurance; overcoming comforts and 
hardships) 
 samãdhãn  (stability;  balance  of  mind  and  focus  on 
Bhagvãn) 
 shraddhã (faith; persistence) 

Glossary 
- 855 - 
shelu Rich fabric with a silky finish woven with golden or silver 
threads  and  decorative  edges.      It  is  worn  as  an  upper 
garment  or  tied  around  the  head  or  waist,  or  even  left  to 
rest upon the shoulders. 
Shesh A dev with  the svarup of  a  cobra.    He  lives  in  Pãtãl  where 
he acts as the bed of Vishnu.  This gives Bhagvãn the name 
of Shesh-Shãyi-Nãrãyan. 
Shesh-Shãyi 
Nãrãyan 
The svarup of Bhagvãn when  He  is  resting  upon Shesh in 
Pãtãl. 
shikhã A  long  tuft  or  lock  of  hair  left  at  the  back  of  the  shaven 
head  of  males.  The shikhã is  usually  kept  at  the brahm-
randhra. 
shikhar The dome above a mandir. 
shikhar-bandh 
mandir 
A mandir with  domes  on  the  top.    Below  each  dome  is  a 
three-dimensional murti, carved in stone, wood, or metal. 
shikshã Knowledge.  Enlightenment.  Wisdom. 
Shikshãpatri Concise shãstra of    212    Sanskrit    verses    written    by 
Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn on Vasant Panchmi (Mahã sud 5), 
for  all  of  His  followers:    male  and  female,  married,  young 
and  old, tyãgi and grahastha,  educated  and  uneducated, 
and   even   those   in   sovereign   power.      Serves   as   a 
fundamental  code  of  conduct  encompassing  everything 
from  basic  civic  norms  (from  personal  hygiene  to  social 
ethics), up to universal philosophy and spirituality. 
shingadiyo 
vachhnãg 
Type    of    aquatic    plant    whose    leaves    are    potently 
poisonous. 
shishumãr chakra Shishumãr wheel.    One  of  the  centres  of  spiritual  energy 
located  in  the  inner  body,  seen  as  a  seat  of  instinctive 
consciousness. 
shishya Disciple of a guru. 
Shiv The dev of  destruction.    Part  of  the trimurti.    He  lives  in 
Kailas with his wife Pãrvati. 
shlok A verse from shãstras. 

Glossary 
- 856 - 
shraddhã The  quality  that  incorporates  determination,  faith,  trust, 
hope, patience, and persistence. 
shravan 1) To listen to talks of Bhagvãn through the ears. 
2) The  term  also  means  the  initial  intake  of gnãn from 
any of the outer indriyas.  In this sense, darshan, intake 
of gnãn through  the  eyes,  is  also  considered  a  form  of 
shravan.    However,  the  intake  of gnãn through  the 
process  of shravan (listening)  must  be  strengthened 
with manan (thinking)  and nididhyãs (remember)  if  it 
is to lead to the sãkshãtkãr (realisation) of that gnãn. 
Shrãvan Second   month   of   the Ãshãdhi Samvat   year,   normally 
falling between July and August. 
Shree 1) Name of Lakshmi. 
2) Used  before  the  names  of Bhagvãn and devs to  signify 
their high status. 
Shreemad Bhãgvat Most  popular  of the  eighteen  Purãns  written  by Vyãsji.    It 
narrates the life, leelãs, and charitras of various avatãrs of 
Bhagvãn,  particularly Shree Krishna Bhagvãn.    One  of  the 
eight shãstras accepted  as  trustworthy  by Swãminãrãyan 
Bhagvãn. 
Shrivatsa Divine  marking  found  on  the  chests  of murtis of Bhagvãn 
and Shree Krishna, similar to a birthmark. 
shrotra Ears.  Physical organ of sound (one of the indriyas). 
Shruti That  which  is  revealed  and  heard.    Philosophical  and 
spiritual wisdom – as revealed to the rushis after strict tap 
and deep dhyãn.  The four Veds are Shruti shãstras. 
shudra Labourer.    Skilled  worker  traditionally  serving  the  other 
three varnas (brãhmans, kshatriyas,  and vaishyas).    The 
lowest  of  the  four varnas (castes)  of  the  ancient  Indian 
social system. 
shuli Sharp, pointed vertical stake to which a criminal is bound 
and  then  allowed  to  be  pierced  by  his  or  her  own  weight 
as   the   pole   is   turned.      A   form   of   brutal   execution 
performed  in  public  as  an  effective  deterrent  to  major 
crimes. 

Glossary 
- 857 - 
shushka-gnãn Dry  knowledge.    Refers  to  the  Advait  philosophy.    It  is 
called ‘dry’ as it disclaims the existence of a personal 
Bhagvãn,  and  so  does  not  propose  any  form  of bhakti 
towards Him. 
shushka-vedãnt Dry vedãnt.  The Advait philosophy.  The Vedãnt principle 
proposing    that    the    ultimate    reality    is    only brahm.  
Referred to as ‘dry’ because it denies the existence of a 
personal Bhagvãn,  His  eternally  divine svarup,  and  His 
dhãm.    Therefore,  it  does  not  propose  any  form  of bhakti 
or worship of Bhagvãn and His avatãrs.  [Gadhadã II – 19] 
[Gadhadã III – 28]. 
shushka-vedãnti A   person   who   follows   the shushka-vedãnt philosophy.  
One of the four types of kusangis. 
Shvet-Dvip The dhãm of Vãsudev Bhagvãn.    The muktas of Shvet-Dvip 
are called niranna-muktas,  as  they  do  not consume  water 
(nir) or food (ann).  Also, they are free from the shad-urmi 
(six  physical  and  emotional  feelings).  The muktas that 
reside  in  this dhãm are ãtmãs who  have  been  freed  from 
the  cycle  of  births  and  deaths,  but  have  not  yet  attained 
Akshardhãm.  So, they perform continuous tap, in order to 
attain ultimate moksh. 
Siddh A yogi. 
siddh-dashã Elevated   state.      No   differentiation   is   made   between 
objects  and  pleasant  and  unpleasant vishays.    Attained  by 
those who have become yogis.  A person with siddh-dashã 
has   the   ability   to   see   for   thousands   of   miles   while 
remaining  in  one  place,  and  hear  talks  from  thousands  of 
miles  away,  and  he  has  the  ability  to obtain  any  object 
with his own hands, even from other loks. 
siddhi Wealth.  Riches.  The siddhi are shown to bhaktas on their 
way to Akshardhãm, to test their love for Bhagvãn. 
sinhãsan Decorated throne. 
Sitãji The  wife  of Shree  Rãm.    Also  called  Jãnki,  Vaidehi,  and 
Maithili. 
skandh Chapter.  Section.  Volume of a shãstra. 

Glossary 
- 858 - 
smaran Remembrance.  To remember. 
Smruti That  which  is  remembered.    The  Smruti shãstras were 
written after remembering past events.  These include the 
Purãns, Upanishads, Mahãbhãrat, Rãmãyan, and 
Shreemad Bhãgvat. 
sneh Affection.  Love. 
sparsh A  touch.    One  of  the panch-vishays.   Sparsh is  the  physical 
element   of vãyu,   and   is   perceived   by   the   skin.      The 
characteristics  of sparsh are  softness,  hardness,  cold,  and 
heat. 
sthãvar Immobile.  Inanimate.  Life-forms such as trees. 
sthitapragna A   person   with   a   stable   understanding.  A bhakta of 
Bhagvãn who has no doubts at all regarding the svarup of 
Bhagvãn,  and  glorifies  His  strengths.    He  also  glorifies 
those charitras of Bhagvãn that     appear     to     be 
inappropriate,  in  exactly  the  same  way  that  he  glorifies 
charitras that are appropriate.   [Gadhadã II – 17]. 
sthiti 1) The level of the spiritual state of a bhakta. 
2) Sustenance of the world. 
Sthul Physical.    One  of  the  three  bodies  of  the jeev.    It  is  the 
visible, physical body of the jeev, which is composed of the 
five bhuts.    The jeev attains  a  different sthul body  upon 
each birth. 
Stotra A hymn of praise. 
Sud Bright half of a Hindu lunar month in which the moon is in 
its  waxing  phase.    The  days  between Amãs up  to  and 
including Punam. Also called shukla paksh. 
sudarshan chakra Fiery,  disc-like  weapon  originally  used  by Bhagvãn,  with 
the power and radiance of several suns. 
sukshma Subtle.  One of the three bodies of the jeev.  It is the subtle 
body  of  the jeev,  which  is  composed  of  nineteen tattvas:  
the  five gnãn-indriyas,  the five karma-indriyas,  the  five 
prãns,  and  the  four antah-karans.    Unlike  the sthul body, 
the sukshma body  is  not  visible  and  is  commonly  thought 
of as the mental body. 

Glossary 
- 859 - 
Survãl Loose trousers. 
Surya-Dev The dev of the Sun. 
sushumnã 1) Uninterrupted path of light from the brahm-randhra to 
Prakruti-Purush.  [Gadhadã I – 65]. 
2) Path  by  which  the  sound  produced  by Parbrahm via 
Akshar-Brahm pervades   the   navel   of Virãt-Purush.  
[Sãrangpur – 6]. 
sushumnã nãdi Nerve  or  channel  transmitting  cosmic  energy  within  the 
inner body of a person, where the current passes through 
the  spinal  column  from  the  base  of  the  spine  and  ends  in 
the brahm-randhra located in the crown of the head.  One 
of the three major nãdis. 
sushupti Unconscious.  Deep sleep.  One of the three mental states.  
The sushupti state  is  the  result  of  the  destruction  state  of 
ishvar.  It is full of tamo-gun and is located in the region of 
the  heart.    In  the sushupti state,  the jeevãtmã is  known  as 
prãgna,  and  is  conscious  of  its kãran body.    [Sãrangpur – 
6]. 
sutrãtmã The  subtle  body  of  the  three  bodies  of Virãt-Purush and 
other ishvars.  Equivalent to the sukshma body of the jeevs.  
[Kãriyãni – 12]. 
svabhãv 1) Nature. 
2) Flaw.      Negative   characteristic.      A   person’s  vicious 
natures, such as kãm, krodh, lobh, and moh.  Also used 
to refer to a person’s natures in the form of habits 
formed  after  repeated  actions,  in  this  birth  or  in  the 
past  lives.    A svabhãv must  be  eradicated  in  order  to 
attain kalyãn,  which  is  achieved  by  listening  to  the 
advice of Bhagvãn and His sant. 
svãd Craving for taste. 
svadharma A person’s own dharma, related to his varna and ãshram. 
svapna Dream.    One  of  the  three  mental  states.    The svapna state 
is the result of the creation state of Hiranyagarbh.  It is full 
of rajo-gun and  is  located  in  the  region  of  the  throat.    In 
the svapna state,  the jeevãtmã is  known  as taijas,  and  is 
conscious of its sukshma body.   [Sãrangpur – 6]. 

Glossary 
- 860 - 
svarup A physical form. 
svastik This  sacred  sign  symbolises  the  focusing  of Bhagvãn’s 
energy  from  all  four  directions  to  the  centre.    A chihn on 
Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn’s right foot.  Performing dhyãn on 
this chihn grants  the bhakta a  happy  life  free  of  misery, 
and good luck. 
svayam-prakãsh To  emit  own  light.   Bhagvãn is  described  as svayam-
prakãsh as he is luminous. 
svedaj Born  from  sweat.    Life-forms  born  from  sweat  (lower  life 
forms, such as bacteria). 
Swãminãrãyan 1) The lord of the whole world.  Creator and destroyer of 
everything, 
2) The mantra (mahã-mantra)  given  by Swãminãrãyan 
Bhagvãn to   His bhaktas   in when   Faneni,   after   He 
became  head  of  the sampradãy.    Eventually  people 
began  to  identify  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  by  this mantra and 
called Him Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn.  The mantra holds 
power  greater  than  any  other mantra.    The  greatness 
of  the mantra is described in ‘Je Swãminãrãyan Nãm 
Leshe’ from Shree Hari-Leelãmrut.  
 
 The “Swãminãrãyan” name  burns  the  sins  of  those 
who speak it 
 Bhagvãn’s names  are  in  many shãstras,  but  this  is 
considered the greatest   
 Saying “Swãminãrãyan” once,  is  like  saying  other 
names thousands of times 
 No-one  can  describe  the  rewards  we  receive  from 
saying “Swãminãrãyan” 
 The mantra is  so  great,  that  all  your  desires are 
fulfilled by it 
 It   brings   happiness   and   destroys   sorrows,   and 
allows you to attains Akshardhãm 
 If  it  is  heard  at  the  end  of  life,  even  a  sinner  can 
attain moksh 
 Evil spirits run from the mantra 
 Wisdom awakens after hearing “Swãminãrãyan” 
 The yamduts fear those who say “Swãminãrãyan” 
 As    water    washes    the    body, “Swãminãrãyan” 
cleanses the soul 

Glossary 
- 861 - 
T  
Taijas Name  of  the jeevãtmã in  the svapna state,  when  it  is 
conscious of its sukshma body.  [Sãrangpur – 6] 
tãmas-ahankãr One of the three types of ahankãr that evolve from maha-
tattva,   and   from   which   the   five bhuts and   the   five 
tanmãtrãs. 
Tãmasi Relating to tamo-gun.  Full of tamo-gun. 
tamo-gun Quality   of   darkness.      One   of   the   three gun of Mãyã 
(Prakruti) characterised by unconsciousness and 
ignorance.    When tamo-gun prevails,  no  thoughts  arise  in 
the antah-karan,  and  a  person  experiences  a  feeling  of 
emptiness.      Also,   when tamo-gun is   predominant,   the 
rewards    of    any karmas performed    by    a jeev are 
experienced during the state of sushupti.  The products  of 
tamo-gun include    laziness,    sleep,    anger,    and    greed.   
[Kãriyãni – 1] [Gadhadã II – 43]. 
tanmãtrã A  subtle  element,  in  contrast  to  the  five bhuts.    There  are 
five tanmãtrãs in total and each one is the root cause of its 
corresponding bhut:    sights  (of tej),  sounds  (of ãkãsh), 
smells (of pruthvi), tastes (of jal) and touch (of vãyu). Also 
called vishay. 
tap  
(pronounced tup) 
Physical  strictness.    Penance.  Enduring  harsh  weather 
conditions. 
tapasvi A person who performs tap. 
tapta-kruchhra Form of harsh tap which involves a twelve-day vrat: three 
days  on  three pali (340g)  of    warm  water,  followed  by 
three  days  on  two pali (227g)  of  warm  milk,  followed  by 
three  days  on  one pali (113g)  of  warm ghee,  follow  by 
three days of complete fasting. 
tattva An  element.    That  which  is  produced  from Mãyã.    There 
are twenty-four tattvas that have evolved from Mãyã:  the 
five gnãn-indriyas,  the  five karma-indriyas,  the  five prãns, 
and the four antah-karans. 
tej Fire  or  energy.    One  of  the  five bhuts,  from  which  the 
physical  world  (Virãt-Purush)  is  formed.    It  is  luminous, 

Glossary 
- 862 - 
causes  the  digestion  of  food,  absorbs  liquids,  eliminates 
cold,  dries,  creates  hunger  and  thirst,  and  burns  wood, 
ghee and other sacrificial offerings.   [Gadhadã I-12]. 
thãl Food devotionally offered to Bhagvãn as a form of bhakti, 
which in turn blesses the food – turning it into prasãd. 
til A small mole (beauty spot).  
tirth A place of pilgrimage. 
torã A   tassel,   usually   hung   from   a pãgh.    Swãminãrãyan 
Bhagvãn often wore torã made of flowers. 
Tretã-Yug Second  of  the  four yugs that  mark  the  time-scale  of  the 
world.      Lasting   1,296,000   human   years,   it   was   when 
purity   and   righteousness   had   slightly   diminished,   the 
instincts  of  the kshatriyas prevailed,  people  lived  to  be 
10,000, and people’s wishes were not so readily fulfilled.  
Called  the Tretã-Yug,  or  age  of  three,  because  the  general 
ratio  of  good  deeds  performed  to  bad  deeds  was  three  to 
one. 
trigunãtmik The three gun of Mãyã – sattva-gun, rajo-gun, tamo-gun. 
trikon A  triangle.    A chihn on Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn’s left  foot.  
Performing dhyãn on  this chihn frees  a bhakta from  the 
bondage and the three bodies – sthul, sukshma, kãran; and 
the  three  mental  states – jãgrat,  svapna;  sushupti. He 
becomes brahm-rup. 
trimurti Three devs responsible  for  the  control  of  a brahmãnd.  
Brahma (creator), Vishnu (sustainer), Shiv (destroyer). 
trushnã Craving.  Desire. 
tulsi 1) Basil.    Variety  of  plant  in  the  mint  family,  native  to 
warm   regions.      Its   aromatic   leaves   have   inherent 
healing  qualities  and  also  is  often  used  as  seasoning.  
Used  as  a  fragrant  offering  to Bhagvãn.  The  wood  of 
the  plant  is  also  used  in  the  making  beads  for mãlãs 
and kanthis. 
2) Bhagvãn made  a pati-vratã named  Vrundã  break  her 
pati-vratã vow.    So,  she  cursed Bhagvãn and  turned 
Him  into shãligrãm (stone),  and  He  in  turn  cursed 

Glossary 
- 863 - 
Vrundã and turned her into tulsi (plant).  However, He 
also gave her the vardãn that she will be present in the 
pujã of Bhagvãn.    Therefore, tulsi is  considered  to  be 
extremely  holy.    The  wedding  of Tulsi and Bhagvãn is 
celebrated every year. 
turyapad Fourth  mental  state,  which  refers  to Bhagvãn – who  is 
beyond  the  three  mental  states  of jãgrat, svapna,  and 
sushupti.   That  which  gives  knowledge  of  the  distinctions 
between the mental states to the jeevãtmã, and who gives 
the jeev the  rewards  of  its karmas  accordingly  within 
those  states,  is  known as turyapad,  as  the antaryãmi,  as 
the drashtã, as Brahm, and also as Parbrahm. 
tvak Skin.  Physical organ of touch (one of the indriyas). 
tyãg To abandon. 
tyãgi A person who has abandoned the world and worldly life. 
  
U  
udbhij Born  from  passing through.    Life-forms  born  out  of  the 
ground (all forms of plant-life). 
Uddhav Sampradãy The sampradãy of  Uddhav.  Name  used  by Swãminãrãyan 
Bhagvãn to   refer   to   the   Swãminãrãyan   Sampradãy.  
Named after Rãmãnand Swãmi, who initiated 
Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn and who   was   considered   the 
avatãr of  Uddhav – Shree Krishna’s trusted  advisor  and 
one of his great bhaktas. 
Upanishad Collection  of  philosophical  texts  written  by  the  ancient 
rushis,  that  primarily  revolves  around  the  discussion  of 
the nature of the ãtmã, the world, mãyã, and reality. Of the 
108 Upanishads, ten are considered to be the ‘principal 
Upanishads’ upon which philosophers and ãchãryas have 
written commentaries. 
upãsanã 1) Literally means ‘sitting near’. It is the philosophical 
understanding  of  the  nature  of Bhagvãn – What  is  He 
like?  How  do  we  worship  Him? This  allows  a bhakta to 
become closer to Bhagvãn. 

Glossary 
- 864 - 
2) A firm belief in the sãkãr svarup of Bhagvãn. 
3) Worship of Bhagvãn. 
upastha Genitalia. Physical   organ   of   procreation   (one   of   the 
indriyas). 
updesh Advice.  Guidance. 
upsham When a person becomes absolutely unaware of the world 
while meditating Bhagvãn or his ãtmã.  When his indriyas 
are   presented   with attractive   objects, he   focuses   his 
attention  within,  and  forgets  about  the  attractive  objects.  
As a result, he becomes tranquil and peaceful. 
upvãs A  fast  where  food  is  not  consumed.    However,  a  person 
may drink water if required. 
urdhva-pundra 
tilak 
A yellow ‘U’ mark applied to the forehead made with 
sandalwood  paste,  and  a chãndlo of kum-kum if  made  in 
the centre.  The tilak signifies Nãrãyan (Bhagvãn), and the 
chãndlo signifies Lakshmi.      The tilak and chãndlo are 
applied  during pujã in  the  morning.  It  must  be  applied 
everyday is it is the ãgnã of Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn for all 
of His bhaktas.  The tilak and chãndlo shows that a person 
has  completely  surrendered  his  life  to Bhagvãn and  has 
become  His bhakta.    Females  only  apply  the chãndlo of 
kum-kum. 
urdhva-rekhã Line.   This chihn runs from the space between the big toe 
and  the  first  toe  to  the  heel  of  the  right  foot.    Performing 
dhyãn on  this chihn spiritually  elevates  the  mind  and 
takes  the bhakta to Akshardhãm.    The urdhva-rekhã lines 
are also found on the left foot. 
urdhvaretã Strict brahm-chãri who  does  not  allow  the  ejaculation  of 
semen. 
utpatti Creation. 
uttam Highest.  Best.  Superior. 
  
V  
vachan 1) A command.  An ãgnã. 

Glossary 
- 865 - 
2) A promise. 
3) Words or speech. 
Vachanãmrut Amrut in  the  form  of  words.    A  collection  of  273  spiritual 
talks   delivered   by Swãminãrãyan   Bhagvãn,   that   were 
carefully  noted  and  collated  by  His  senior sãdhus in  His 
presence,   and   were   authenticated   by   Him.      Central 
philosophical shãstra of  the  Swãminãrãyan  Sampradãy 
that summarises the essence of all Hindu shãstras. 
vad Dark half of a Hindu lunar month in which the moon is in 
its  waning  phase.    The  days  falling  between  the  day  after 
Punam up  to  and  including Amãs.  Also  called  krishna 
paksh. 
vadvãnal Form  of fire  that  resides  within  the  oceans,  yet  it  never 
extinguishes. 
vaijayanti Unique  garland  adorned   by Bhagvãn and  His avatãrs, 
generally  depicted  as  reaching  down  to  the  feet.    Made  of 
five types of gems (rubies, pearls, sapphires, emeralds and 
diamonds – representing the five elements) and/or divine 
flowers that never wither. 
vaikhari When  the  ‘parã’ speech   reached   the   mouth   of Virãt-
Purush, it became known by the name of ‘vaikhari’. 
Vaikunth The dhãm of Vishnu, and Rãm Bhagvãn. 
vairãgya Detachment.  A hatred or strong dislike for the world and 
its mãyik pleasures   (the panch-vishays).      Remaining 
detached  from  the  body  and  the brahmãnd,  and  from  all 
things  that  are  the  products  of Prakruti.    One  of  the  four 
attributes of ekãntik dharma. 
Vaishãkh Tenth month of the Ãshãdhi Samvat year, normally falling 
between April and May. 
Vaishnav Follower of Bhagvãn’s various avatãrs, in particular Shree 
Krishna Bhagvãn.  Relating to Vishnu. 
vaishvãnar Fire  of  digestion.    The  energy  that  allows  food  to be 
digested. 
vaishya Merchant.  Businessman or employer traditionally dealing 
with  financial  and  commercial  matters  in  society.    The 

Glossary 
- 866 - 
third  of  the  four varnas (castes)  of  the  ancient  Indian 
social system.  
vajra The vajra is  a  weapon  that  is  as  long  as  a trident carried 
by Indra.  A chihn on Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn’s right  foot.  
Performing dhyãn on  this chihn helps  a bhakta overcome 
his  inner  enemies,  and  removes  the  desires  for  material 
pleasures, which enables the mind to focus on Bhagvãn. 
vãk Voice.  Physical organ of speech (one of the indriyas). 
Vãman An avatãr of Bhagvãn.    He  incarnated  in  the svarup of  a 
dwarf.   Vãman asked  Bali  (demon  king)  to  grant  Him 
three steps of Bali’s kingdom, to which Bali agreed.  With 
the  first  step, Vãman covered  all  of  the  earth.  With  the 
second step, he covered all of the heavens.  With the third 
step, Vãman pushed Bali into Pãtal. 
Vãniyã A   class   of   people   of   the vaishya varna,   traditionally 
engaged in commercial activities. 
vãnprasth ashram Third  of  the  four  stages  of  life,  when  a  person  withdraws 
from  some  social  duties  and  serves  merely  as  an  elderly 
advisor.  Literally implying ‘taking to the forests’. 
van-vicharan Wondering the forest. The pilgrimage of Nilkanth Varni is 
called van vicharan, as He walked through many forests. 
Varãh An avatãr of Bhagvãn.    He  incarnated  in  the svarup of  a 
wild  boar.    Hiranyaksha  was  a  demon  who  stole  the  Veds 
and   drowned   the   earth.    Varãh killed   Hiranyaksha, 
retrieved  the  Veds,  and  saved  the  earth  by  lifting  it  from 
the ocean on his tusks. 
vardãn Blessing.  Gift. 
varna A  caste  of  the  ancient  Indian  social  system:   brãhman, 
kshatriya, vaishya, and sudra. 
vartmãn A vow. 
Varun-Dev The dev of water. 
vãsnã  Desire. A  desire  within  the antah-karans to  enjoy vishays 
that  have  been  previously  seen,  heard,  or  encountered, 
and  those  that have  not  yet  been  encountered. It  remains 

Glossary 
- 867 - 
with  the jeev after  death  of  the  body. The vãsnã must  be 
destroyed in order to attain kalyãn. It can be destroyed by 
performing dhyãn upon Bhagvãn. A  person whose  only 
vãsnã is Bhagvãn is called an ekãntik bhakta. 
Vãsudev 
Vãsudev-Nãrãyan 
One of the four forms of Bhagvãn’s Vishvarup svarup.   His 
role  is  to  be  worshipped  by  the jeevs in  the brahmãnd 
(Virãt-Purush).    The  four-armed svarup of Bhagvãn.    He 
holds  four  different  weapons:   gadã, padma, shankh,  and 
chakra. 
Vãsudev Mahãtmya A  portion  of  the  Skand  Purãn  describing  how  an ekãntik 
bhakta should  offer bhakti to Bhagvãn  while  possessing 
dharma, gnãn and vairãgya.    One  of  the  eight shãstras 
accepted as trustworthy by Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn. 
vãyu Air.    One  of  the  five bhuts,  from  which  the  physical  world 
(Virãt-Purush) is formed.  It causes trees to shake, gathers 
leaves and other objects, carries the panch-vishays (sights, 
sounds,  smells,  tastes,  and  touches)  to  their indriyas,  and 
is the vital force of all of the indriyas. 
Vãyu-Dev The dev of wind and air. 
Ved Knowledge.    Most  sacred  and  respected  set  of shãstras, 
the  oldest  portions  of  which  are  also  recognised  as  the 
most  ancient  writings  in  history.    It  is  a  collection  of 
divine   revelations   imparting   philosophical   wisdom   as 
revealed  to  the rushis after  strict tap and  deep dhyãn.  
Therefore,   the   Veds   are   called Shruti shãstras,   as   the 
knowledge  was  revealed  and  heard.    Consists  of  four 
parts: Rig Ved, Sãm Ved, Yajur Ved, and Atharva Ved. 
Vedãnt A   conclusion   of   the   Veds.      The   principle   of   thought 
explained in the Upanishads, which reveals the conclusive 
teachings of the Veds.  The principle centres on the nature 
of  the ãtmã,  the  world,  reality,  and  personal  experience.  
Although    different ãchãryas have    written    extensive 
commentaries  upon  the  Upanishads  and  proposed  their 
personal  principles  that  can  also  be  called  Vedãnt,  the 
term   is   often   used   specifically   to   refer   to   the   Advait 
philosophy. 
vedãnti A person who promotes or follows the Vedãnt philosophy, 
but  generally  used  for  someone  who  accepts  the  Advait 

Glossary 
- 868 - 
philosophy.  
vedic From the Veds. 
Ved-Stuti A portion of the Shreemad  Bhãgvat (skandh ten) in which 
the Veds praise the glory and greatness of Bhagvãn. 
vidhi The  “do’s”. That   which   morally   should   be   done   (in 
contrast to nishedh). 
Vidur-Niti The  code  of  political  ethics  explained  Vidur,  the  educated 
statesman,  to  his  elder  brother,  Dhrutrãshtra  Rãjã.    It 
forms   portion   of   the   Mahãbhãrat.      One   of   the   eight 
shãstras accepted    as    trustworthy    by Swãminãrãyan 
Bhagvãn. 
vidyã Knowledge of attaining Bhagvãn. 
vidyãdhars A  heavenly  servant  of Indra,  thought  to  live  between  the 
skies and earth. 
vimãn Flying vehicle. 
virãt The physical body of the three bodies of Virãt-Purush and 
other ishvars.    Equivalent  to  the sthul body  of  the jeev.  
[Kãriyãni – 12]. 
Virãt-Purush 1) An ishvar ‘conceived’ by one of the countless pairs of 
Pradhãn-Purush.      A svarup assumed   by Bhagvãn 
through Purush and Prakruti,  and  through  whom  He 
then  grants Brahmã and  other jeevs their  bodies.    By 
nature,  he  is  like  a jeev,  with  his  actions  also  being 
similar  to  that  of  a jeev – but  with  a  lifespan  of  two 
parãrdhs (2   x   10
17
 human   years).      The   creation, 
sustenance,  and  destruction  of  this brahmãnd are  his 
three states.  [Gadhadã II – 31]. 
2) He   is   also   the   physical   world   (Virãt-Purush)   or   a 
brahmãnd,  which  is  a  human  form.    However,  it  is 
beyond  visualisation  due  to  its  immense  size.    Also 
known as Purush-Avatãr.  [Gadhadã I – 63]. 
vishalya-karani An ancient herbal medicine considered to relieve a person 
of  any  stab  wounds  in  the  body  by  causing  the  weapon 
that he has been stabbed with to fall out from the body. 
vishay An  object  indulged  in  by  the jeev through  the  ten indriyas 

Glossary 
- 869 - 
(senses).    The  five  types  of vishays are:    sights,  sounds, 
smells,   tastes,   and   touches   (panch-vishays).      The jeev 
cannot remain without indulging in the vishays.  However, 
vishays related   to Bhagvãn strengthen   the jeev,   while 
vishays related  to  the  world  pollute  the jeev.    The jeev’s 
deep  desire  to  indulge  in  the  pleasures  of  the vishays 
deflects it from the path of kalyãn.  [Gadhadã I – 8]. 
Vishnu The dev of  sustenance.    Part  of  the trimurti.    He  lives  in 
Vaikunth with his wife Lakshmi. 
vishnupad A kirtan written  by  the  great  Vaishnav bhakta Narsinh 
Mehtã,  which  narrates  the charitras of Krishna  Bhagvãn.  
Can  also  refer  to  a  general kirtan of Bhagvãn or  His 
avatãrs. 
Vishnu-Sahasranãm A shãstra praising  the  thousand  sacred  names  of Vishnu.  
One  of  the   eight shãstras accepted  as  trustworthy   by 
Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn. 
Vishnu-Yãg A yagna performed  to  seek  the  blessings  of Vishnu,  and 
Bhagvãn 
vishva Name   of   the jeevãtmã in   the jãgrat state,   when   it   is 
conscious of its sthul body.  [Sãrangpur – 6] 
Vishvarup Literally means ‘svarup of the world’.  This svarup was 
shown  to  Arjun  by Shree Krishna  Bhagvãn.    The svarup 
consists  of  four  different  forms:   Vãsudev, Pradyumna, 
Aniruddha,  and Sankarshan.    They  each  have  different 
roles  and  responsibilities  in  a brahmãnd (Virãt-Purush).  
Sankarshan, Aniruddha,   and Pradyumna are   the sagun 
svarups of Vãsudev Bhagvãn,  and  it  is  the  strength  of  the 
upãsanã of Virãt-Purush that   he   becomes   capable   of 
performing   the   activities   of   creation,   sustenance,   and 
destruction.   Also, as long as Virãt-Purush worships these 
three, his association with Mãyã – in the form of creation, 
sustenance, and destruction – is not broken.  It is when he 
worships Vãsudev Bhagvãn,  who  is nirgun,  that Virãt-
Purush abandons Mãyã and becomes brahm-rup.   
vivek Wisdom.  Discretion.  Carefulness.  Good judgment. 
vrat An observance, usually consisting of an upvãs. 

Glossary 
- 870 - 
vrutti Concentration.    Focus.    The jeev’s vrutti can  be  thought  of 
as  the jeev’s focus  of  attention.    The jeev can  experience 
the  physical  world  (Virãt-Purush)  through  the indriyas.  
Similarly  the jeev can  think  about,  or  have  a  desire  about 
the  world  through  the antah-karans.    When  the jeev’s 
attention   is   focused   on   a   physical   object   through   the 
indriyas,  it  can  be  said  that  the vruttis of  the indriyas are 
focused   on   that   object.      Similarly,   when   the jeev’s 
attention  is  focused  on  an  object  via  the antah-karans,  it 
can   be   said   that   the vruttis of   the antah-karans are 
focused  on  that  object.    Also,  like  the  focus  of  attention, 
the vrutti can  be  focused  on  many  things  at  once  with 
different levels of intensity.  Also, just as the jeev can focus 
its vrutti outwards, it can also focus it inwards on itself or 
on Paramãtmã residing within. 
Vyãs An avatãr of Bhagvãn born  to  Satyavati  and  Parãshar 
Rushi.    Bhagvãn incarnated   in   the svarup of   a   great 
scholar.  Vyãs made  divisions  in  the  Veds,  and  wrote 
eighteen Purãns, including Shreemad Bhãgvat. 
Vyãs Sutra Extremely concise, cryptic sayings, explaining the essence 
of  the  Upanishads,  written  by  Vyãs.    Also  known  as  the 
Brahm  Sutra  or  Vedãnt  Sutra.    One  of  the  eight shãstras 
accepted as trustworthy by Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn. 
vyatirek Separate.    Distinct.    Independent.    Unconnected.    When 
used   for Bhagvãn,   implies   He   is   beyond   everything.  
[Gadhadã I – 7]. 
vyom Space  (ãkãsh);  present  in pruthvi, jal, tej,  and vãyu,  but  it 
remains  unaffected  by  them.    A chihn on Swãminãrãyan 
Bhagvãn’s left  foot.    Similarly,  a bhakta performing dhyãn 
on  this chihn remains  detached  from  the  material  world 
and Bhagvãn resides within the purified space of his heart 
(hruday-ãkãsh).  
Y  
Yagna An avatãr of Bhagvãn.   He incarnated in  the svarup of the 
king  of  the devs,  and  temporarily  replaced Indra.  His 
teaching   was   based   on   the   values   of   helpfulness   and 
protecting each other during the time of crisis. 
yagna Sacrificial  worship.    Ceremonial  ritual  performed  as  a 

Glossary 
- 871 - 
form  of  worship  to  seek  the  good  favour  and  receive  the 
blessings of the devs.  Different items, such as ghee, grains, 
wood,  and  spices,  are  offered  into  a  sacred  pit  of  fire  in 
accordance with strict scriptural niyams with the chanting 
of mantras that are prescribed in the Veds. 
Yãgnavalkya Smruti One  of  the  principal  ancient  Smruti shãstras.    Written  by 
Yãgnavalkya  Rushi.    He  drew on  the  works  of  Manu,  and 
sometimes even paraphrased several of Manu’s verses 
into  his  own  words.    The  teachings  of  the shãstra include 
dharma,  legal  procedures, tyãgis, tap,  and moksh.   One  of 
the eight shãstras accepted as trustworthy by 
Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn. 
yagnopavit A sacred white thread, worn from the left shoulder to the 
waist.  It is worn by brãhmans.  A ceremony (upanayan) is 
performed  when  the yagnopavit is  received,  usually  after 
the   age   of   seven.      Traditionally,   the   ceremony   was 
performed  to  mark  the  point  at  which  boys  began  their 
formal  education.    The yagnopavit is  also  given  to  a sant 
when he receives his dikshã. 
yam Restraint.  First step of ashtãng-yog, which involves moral 
living for purity of mind and unobstructed concentration. 
yamduts The terrifying servants of Yam-Rãj, who punish those who 
have sinned. 
Yampuri The  city  of  Yam-Rãj.    Where nãstiks and  sinners  are  sent 
after death to suffer for their sins at the hands of Yam-Rãj 
and the yamduts.  After suffering for their sins, these jeevs 
continue  to  on  the  cycle  of  births  and  deaths.  Also  called 
Narak. 
Yam-Rãj The dev of  justice.    The  lord  of Yampuri,  who  protects 
dharma by  punishing  those  who  have  sinned.    Also  called 
Dharma-Rãj. 
yati A   person   who   firmly   follows brahm-chãrya and   has 
conquered  all  of  his indriyas should  be  known  as  a yati.  
[Jetalpur – 2]. 
yãtrã Pilgrimage.  Spiritual journey. 
yog The  philosophy  of  focusing  and  quieting  the  fluctuations 

Glossary 
- 872 - 
of    the    mind    through    various    physical    and    mental 
practices,   and   ultimately   aiming   for   the   union   with 
Bhagvãn.  Also called ashtãng-yog. 
yogi 1) A person who has mastered the art of yog. 
2) A   person   who   has   attained siddh-dashã and   other 
extraordinary powers. 
yogic That which is of a yog or yogi.  [Vadtãl – 4]. 
yog-samãdhi Samãdhi attained as a result of perform yog. 
yog-yagna When  a  person  performs  a sãttvik yagna by  withdrawing 
the  ten indriyas and  the  mind  (the  eleventh indriya)  from 
whichever vishays they have become attached to, and then 
offers them into the brahm-agni.  By continuously making 
these   offerings, Bhagvãn incarnates   Himself   with   the 
brahm-svarup self  of  the  person  who  performs  a yoga-
yagna, just as Bhagvãn grants darshan to the performer of 
a yagna.  This is the reward of the yog-yagna. 
yojan Measure of distance equalling four gãus (approximately 3-
4 miles). 
yug Era.    Age.    Division  of  time  used  to  outline  the  time-scale 
of  the  world.    There  are  four yugs:   Satya-Yug (Era  of 
Goodness), Tretã-Yug (Era  of  Three), Dvãpar-Yug (Third 
Era),   and   finally,   the   present   age, Kali-Yug (Era   of 
Darkness).    The dharmas of  the yugs exist  externally  as 
well as internally in the heart.  [Sãrangpur – 9]. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 874 - 
The four purushãrths  
The four goals pursued by all Hindus. 
 
 dharma – the fulfilment of personal, domestic, and social duties. 
 arth – the fulfilment of desires for material objects, such as wealth. 
 kãm – the fulfilment of a person's personal and social desires. 
 moksh – breaking  free  from  the  cycle  of  births  and  deaths,  and  attaining 
Akshardhãm. 
 
 
 The five religious vows (vartmãn) 
Most of the references to the vartmãns in the Vachanãmrut refer to vartmãns of 
sãdhus, which include the vartmãn of grahasthas. 
 
The five religious vows prescribed for sãdhus: 
 nishkãm – vow of celibacy 
 nirlobh – vow of non-greed 
 nisvãd – vow of detachment from the pleasures of taste 
 nisneh – vow of detachment from bodily relations 
 nirmãn – vow of humility 
 
The five religious vows for grahasthas: 
 Do not consume meat 
 Do not consume alcohol 
 Do not steal 
 Do not commit adultery 
 Do not change someone’s dharma of their varna and ashram by force, and do 
not change your own dharma of your varna and ashram. 
 
 
The five great sins (mahã-pãp) 
A person who commits any of these sins will suffer the miseries of Narak. 
 
 brahm-hatya – killing a brãhman 
 madya-pãn – drinking alcohol 
 suvarnani chori – stealing gold or money 
 guru-stri no sang – having illicit relations with the wife of one’s guru 
 charmãhino  sang – company  of  a  person  engaging  in  any  of  the  previous 
four sins 
 
 
 
 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 875 - 
The nine types of bhakti 
 
 shravanam – listening to kathãs or kirtans related to Bhagvãn. 
 kirtanam – singing or talking about Bhagvãn. 
 smaranam – remembering Bhagvãn. 
 pãd-sevanam – massaging Bhagvãn's holy feet. 
 archanam – performing Bhagvãn’s pujã (ãrti, thãl, sandalwood paste) 
 vandanam – bowing before Bhagvãn. 
 dãsyam – behaving as the servant of Bhagvãn. 
 sakhyam – behaving as the friend of Bhagvãn. 
 ãtma-nivedanam – unconditionally offering everything to Bhagvãn. 
 
 
The antah-shatru (inner-enemies) 
These inner enemies must be defeated in order to attain kalyãn. 
 
 kãm 
 krodh 
 lobh 
 moh 
 mãn 
 irshyã 
 asuyã 
 mad 
 matsar 
 ãshã 
 trushnã 
 ahankãr 
 
 
The four types of mukti 
A nishkãm bhakta of Bhagvãn only wishes for His sevã.  He does not desire any 
of the four types of mukti. 
 
 sãlokya – to reside in the dhãm of Bhagvãn 
 sãmeepya – to stay near Bhagvãn 
 sãrupya – to assume a svarup similar to Bhagvãn 
 sãrshti – to attain powers similar to Bhagvãn 
 
 
The eight barriers (asht-ãvaran) 
Eight   barriers   encircle   each brahmãnd,   beyond   which   is   the   divine   light 
Chidãkãsh.  A jeev must cross the eight barriers before it can reach Akshardhãm. 
 
 pruthvi 
 jal 
 tej 
 vãyu 
 ãkãsh 
 maha-tattva 
 Pradhãn 
 Prakruti 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 876 - 
The five eternal entities  
The five eternal entities will never be destroyed. 
 
 jeev 
 ishvar 
 Mãyã 
 Brahm 
 Parbrahm 
  
 
The three gun of Mãyã 
Mãyã is  the  power  of Bhagvãn,  but  is full  of  darkness  and  is  the  source  of 
attachment. 
 
 satva-gun – full of purity, goodness, and awareness 
 rajo-gun – full passion and desires 
 tamo-gun – full darkness, ignorance, and laziness 
 
 
The four parts of the antah-karan 
 
 man – mind; generates thoughts and desires, and governs all of the indriyas 
 buddhi – intelligence; consolidates thoughts, makes decisions, forms beliefs 
 chitt – consciousness; contemplates and thinks  
 ahankãr – ego;  gives  rise  to  the  sense  of  self  and  the  sense  of individual 
existence 
 
 
The twenty-four tattva 
The twenty-four tattvas are the mãyik products of maha-tattva.  The sthul body 
is  composed  of  the  five bhuts,  and  the sukshma body  is  composed  of  the  five 
gnãn-indriyas, the five karma-indriyas, the five prãns, and the four antah-karans. 
 
 five bhut – pruthvi, jal, tej, vãyu, ãkãsh 
 five gnãn-indriyas – shrotra, tvak, chakshu, rasnã, ghran 
 five karma-indriyas – vãk, pãni, pãd, pãyu, upastha 
 five prãns – prãn, apãn, udãn, samãn, vyãn 
 four antah-karans – man, buddhi, chitt, ahankãr 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 877 - 
The five mahã-bhut 
The physical world is created from the five bhut. 
 
 pruthvi – earth 
 jal – water 
 tej – light 
 vãyu – air 
 ãkãsh - space 
 
 
The three bodies (deh) 
Each  embodied  soul  (jeev)  possesses  three  bodies.    A bhakta should  worship 
Bhagvãn,  understanding  his  true  self  as  an ãtmã,  which  is  distinct  from  the 
three bodies. 
 
 sthul body – the physical body, which is the visible body 
 sukshma body – the subtle body, which is the invisible mental body 
 kãran body – the  fundamental  body,  which  stores  the jeev’s karmas and  is 
the cause of rebirth 
 
 
The three mental states of the jeev (avasthã) 
The jeevãtmã indulges in the vishays in three different mental states. 
 
 jãgrat – awake 
 svapna – dream 
 sushupti – deep sleep 
 
 
The five vishay 
The five types of objects that are perceived by the indriyas: 
 
 shabda – sounds 
 sparsh – touches 
 rup – sights 
 ras – tastes 
 gandh – smells 
 
 
The ten indriyas 
The  ten indriyas are  the  senses  that  perceive  the vishays around  them.    Even 
though the indriyas (senses) are distinct from the physical body, each indriya is 
linked to a sense organ.  However, the name given to the indriyas are the names 
of the organs. 
 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 878 - 
five gnãn-indriyas  
 shrotra – ears 
 tvak – skin 
 chakshu – eyes 
 rasnã – tongue 
 ghran – nose 
five karma-indriyas  
 vãk – voice 
 pãni – hands 
 pãd – feet 
 pãyu – anus 
 upastha – genitals 
 
 
The presiding devs 
 
 shrotra (ears) – Digpãl-Dev  
 tvak (skin) – Vãyu-Dev 
 chakshu (eyes) – Surya-Dev  
 rasnã (tongue) – Varun-Dev 
 ghran (nose) – Ashvin-Kumãr-Dev 
 vãk (voice) – Agni-Dev 
 pãni (hands) – Indra 
 pãd (feet) – Vishnu 
 pãyu (anus) – Yam-Rãj 
 upastha (genitals) – Prajãpati 
 
 man (mind) – Chandra 
 buddhi (intelligence) – Brahmã 
 chitt (consciousness) – Vãsudev 
 ahankãr (ego) – Rudra 
 
 
The five prãns 
Life force or energy flowing within the primary life-currents of the body, called 
vãyu,  which  control  crucial  bodily  functions.    They  are  vital  airs  that  evolve 
from rãjas-ahankãr. 
 
 prãn –  forward moving air 
 apãn – air that moves away 
 udãn – upward moving air  
 samãn – balancing air 
 vyãn – outward moving air  
 
 
The four types of bhaktas 
 
 ãrta – a  person  who  is  distressed  after  falling  from  the  path  of  attaining 
siddh-dashã, but still wishes to attain them 
 jignãsu – a person who seeks knowledge of the ãtmã (ãtmã-nisthã) 
 arthãthi – a person who desires material objects, such as material pleasures 
and powers 
 gnãni – a person with gnãn 
 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 879 - 
The eight factors of influence 
If   these   influences   are   pleasant,   they   purify   the   mind;   and   if   they   are   u
npleasant, they pollute the mind. 
 
 desh – place 
 kãl – time 
 kriyã – action 
 sang – company 
 mantra – phrase 
 shãstra – scripture 
 dikshã – initiation 
 dhyãn – mediation 
 
  
The twenty-four svarups of Vishnu 
The  twenty-four svarups forms  of Vishnu are  the  twenty-four  names  given  to 
Vishnu based  on  the  variations  of  the  four  objects  he  holds  in  his  four  hands.  
For  example,  in  the svarup of  Vãsudev,  he  holds  the gadã in  his  lower  right 
hand, and padma in his upper right hand, the shankh in his upper left hand, and 
the chakra in  his  lower  left  hand;  but,  in  the svarup of  Nãrãyan,  he  holds  the 
chakra in  his  lower  right  hand,  the gadã in  his  upper  right  hand,  the padma in 
his upper left hand, and the shankh in his lower left hand. 
 
1. Keshav 
2. Nãrãyan 
3. Mãdhav 
4. Govind 
5. Vishnu 
6. Madhusudan 
7. Trivikram 
8. Vãman 
9. Shridhar 
10. Hrushikesh 
11. Padmanãbh 
12. Dãmodar 
13. Sankarshan 
14. Vãsudev 
15. Pradyumna 
16. Aniruddha 
17. Purushottam 
18. Adhokshaj 
19. Nrusinh 
20. Achyut 
21. Janãrdan 
22. Upendra 
23. Hari 
24. Krishna 
 
 
The avatãrs of Bhagvãn 
Bhagvãn incarnates on Earth for the welfare of society and for the kalyãn of the 
jeevs.   Bhagvãn is  always  present  in Bharat-Khand through  these  incarnations 
or  His sãdhus.    He  assumes  various avatãrs according  to  whichever  task  needs 
to  be  accomplished  in  whichever  place,  and  each avatãr possesses  varying 
amounts  of Bhagvãn’s power.   There  are countless  millions  of avatãrs of 
Bhagvãn, each with varying amounts of Bhagvãn’s power. 
 
Descriptions of many avatãrs are  written  in  the shãstras,  of which  twenty-four 
avatãrs are  considered  to  be  of  most  importance.    From  the  twenty-four 
avatãrs,  ten avatãrs are  considered  as major avatãrs,  with  a  greater  degree  of 
the presence of Bhagvãn than others. 
 
 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 880 - 
The most common list of the twenty-four avatãrs stated in the Purãns are:  
 
1. Sanakãdik  
2. Varãh 
3. Matsya 
4. Hayagriv 
5. Hans 
6. Yagna 
7. Kurma 
8. Dhanvantari 
9. Mohini 
10. Pruthu 
11. Nãrad 
12. Rushabh-Dev 
13. Dattãtrey 
14. Kapil-Dev 
15. Nar-Nãrãyan 
16. Hari 
17. Nrusinh 
18. Vãman 
19. Parshurãm 
20. Vyãs 
21. Rãm 
22. Krishna 
23. Buddh 
24. Kalki 
 
Of these, the ten major avatãrs of Bhagvãn are: 
 
1. Matsya 
2. Kurma 
3. Varãh 
4. Nrusinh 
5. Vãman 
6. Parshurãm 
7. Rãm 
8. Krishna 
9. Buddh 
10. Kalki 
 
 
 
 
 
The eight sat-shãstras 
The   eight shãstras held   as   trustworthy   and   of   special   significance   by 
Swãminãrãyan  Bhagvãn.    He  extracted  the  essence  from  all  these shãstras and 
wrote them in His notebook. 
 
 The Veds 
 The Vyãs Sutra 
 The Shreemad Bhãgvat Purãn 
 The Vishnu-Sahasranãm from Mahãbhãrat 
 The Bhagvad Geetã 
 The Vidur-Niti 
 The Vãsudev Mahãtmya, from the Vishnu-Khand of the Skand Purãn 
 The Yãgnavalkya Smruti 
 
 
The six physical and emotional feelings (shad-urmi) 
 
 thirst 
 hunger 
 grief 
 infatuation 
 old age 
 death 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 881 - 
The nine types of emotions 
The   nine   emotions   are   different   dramatic   moods   that   produce   different 
emotional effects. 
 
 shrungãr – affectionate 
 hãsya – humorous 
 karun – sad 
 vir – heroic 
 raudra – fierce 
 bhayãnak – horrific 
 bibhatsa – vulgar 
 adbhut – wondrous 
 shãnt – tranquil 
 
 
 
The four types of speech 
 
 parã – the divine sound produced in the navel of Virãt-Purush. 
 pashyanti – when  the parã speech  reached  the hruday-ãkãsh of  Virãt,  it 
became known as pashyanti. 
 madhyamã –when  the parã speech  reached  the  throat  of Virãt-Purush,  it 
became known by as madhyamã. 
 vaikhari – when  the parã speech  reached  the  mouth  of Virãt-Purush,  it 
became known as vaikhari. 
 
 
The four weapons carried by Bhagvãn 
 
 shankh – conch shell 
 gadã – mace 
 padma – lotus 
 chakra – razor-bladed disc 
 
 
The four aspects of ekãntik dharma 
 
 dharma – the practice of morality, religious duties and responsibilities 
 bhakti – devotion to Bhagvãn 
 gnãn – knowledge that  lead  to kalyãn;  the  knowledge  of  the ãtmã and the 
svarup and greatness of Bhagvãn. 
 vairãgya – detachment;  a  hatred  or  strong  dislike  for  the  world  and  its 
mãyik pleasures 
 
 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 882 - 
The four types of kusangis 
A person who is bad company is called a kusangi, and they have a bad influence 
on someone’s progress in satsang,  and  leads  them  astray  from satsang.  There 
are four types of kusangis:  
 
 shakti-panthi – They  worship  Shakti,  as  the  governing  power  of  the  world, 
and  they  believe  the  consumption  of  meat  and alcohol  to  be  holy.    Animals 
are sacrificed in front of a murti Shakti, and offered as prasãd. 
 
 kudã-panthi – A follower of a cult whose beliefs are against the teachings of 
the Veds.  They falsely state the five 'M’ as a means to kalyãn.    They  are: 
madya (alcohol), mãns (meat), matsya (fish), mudrã (occult markings on the 
body), and maithun (illicit sex). 
 
 shushka-vedãnti – A  follower  of  the  Advait  philosophy,  proposing  that  the 
ultimate   reality  is  only brahm.   They  deny  the   existence  of  a   personal 
Bhagvãn, His eternally divine svarup, and His dhãm. 
 
 nãstik – An  atheist.    A  person  who  does  not  believe  in  the  existence  of 
Bhagvãn, or who is not religious. 
 
 
The 8.4 million births 
The  cycle  of  births  and  deaths  consists  of  8.4  million  births.   These  births  are 
divided into six categories. 
 
 life-forms that have two arms (human, monkey, bear) – 400,000 births 
 small life-forms (insects) – 1,100,000 births 
 immobile life-forms (trees, plants, mountain) – 2,000,000 births 
 animals (cow, dog, elephant) – 3,000,000 births 
 birds (peacock, pigeon) – 1,000,000 births 
 life-forms that live underwater (fish) – 900,000 births 
 
 
The fourteen loks of Jambu-Dvip 
 
 Satya-Lok 
 Tap-Lok 
 Jan-Lok 
 Mahar-Lok 
 Svarg-Lok 
 Bhuvar-Lok 
 Mrutyu-Lok (earth) 
 Atal 
 Vital 
 Sutal 
 Talãtal 
 Mahãtal 
 Rasãtal 
 Pãtãl 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 883 - 
The eight siddhi powers (asht-siddhi) 
The powers obtained by those who have become a yogi or siddh. 
 
 animã – the ability to make rocks 
 mahimã – the  ability  to  become  large;  a yogi can  become  as  large  as  a 
mountain 
 garimã – the ability to make oneself heavy; a yogi is not moved even by the 
strongest of winds 
 laghimã – the  ability  to  make  oneself  into  light;  the  ability  to  travel  with  a 
ray of light to the lok of Surya 
 ishitva – the  ability  to  create,  sustain,  and  destroy  living  and  non-living 
entities 
 vashitva – the ability to exert control over living and non-living entities 
 prãpti – the ability to grasp; a yogi can fetch objects that may be extremely 
far away 
 prãkãmya – the ability to make wishes come true 
 
 
The eight types of murti 
There are eight types of murtis that are worthy of worship: 
 
 shaili – stone 
 dãrumayi – wood 
 lauhi – metal 
 lepyã – earth or sandalwood paste 
 lekhyã – engraved or drawn 
 saikati – sand 
 manimayi – gems 
 manomayi – mental 
 
 
The seven components of the physical body 
 
 ras – bodily fluids 
 rakta – blood 
 mãns – muscle 
 med – fat 
 asthi – bones 
 majjã – marrow 
 shukra – semen 
 
 
 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 884 - 
The ten topics to realise Bhagvãn 
The ten characteristics of topics of discussion by which Bhagvãn can be realised: 
 
 sarg – creation from maha-tattva to the five bhuts (up to Virãt-Purush) 
 visarg – creation by Brahmã 
 sthãn – supremacy of Bhagvãn in battle 
 poshan – Bhagvãn’s compassion, as He protects the world 
 uti – karma and vãsnã 
 manvantar-kathã – dharma of Manu and the other kings 
 ishãnu-kathã – charitras  of the avatãrs of Bhagvãn and His bhaktas 
 nirodh – dwelling in a subtle form within the various form of Prakruti 
 mukti – renouncing  the svarup of  a dev or  human,  and  residing  in His 
original svarup 
 ãshray – Bhagvãn as the refuge of the creation, sustenance, and destruction 
of the brahmãnd 
 
 
The ten directions 
 
 uttar – north 
 ishãn – northeast 
 purva – east 
 agni – southeast 
 dakshin – south 
 nairutya – southwest 
 pashchim – west 
 vãyavya – northwest 
 urdhva – up 
 adhah – down 
 
 
The six spiritual activities prescribed by Sãnkhya (shat-sampatti)  
 
 sham – tranquillity 
 dam – self-control; restraint of sense organs 
 uparati – abstinence; refraining from mundane objects and activities 
 titikshã – endurance; overcoming comforts and hardships 
 samãdhãn – stability; balance of mind and focus on Bhagvãn 
 shraddhã – faith; persistence 
 
 
 
 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 885 - 
The eight parts of ashtãng-yog 
The practice of ashtãng-yog involves focusing and minimising the fluctuations 
of  the  mind  through  various  physical  and  mental  practices,  and  ultimately 
aiming for the union with Bhagvãn.  There eight progressive steps of ashtãng-
yog.  The first four steps are physical practices, whereas the last four steps are 
mental practices.  
 
1. yam – restraint;    involves    moral    living    for    purity    of    mind    and 
unobstructed concentration. 
2. niyam – observance  of  religious  practices  and  code  of dharma for  the 
control and refinement of the mind. 
3. ãsan – seat   or   posture;      involves   physical   exercises   of   postures   to 
promote concentration. 
4. prãnãyãm – involves  controlling  of prãns through  breathing  exercises 
leading to the calming of the chitt in preparation for concentration. 
5. pratyãhãr – Withdrawal of  sensory  inputs  into  the  physical  body,  that 
enter through five sense organs. 
6. dhãrnã – concentration;  involves  focusing  of  the  mind  to  guide  the  flow 
of consciousness. 
7. dhyãn – meditation;  involves  sustaining  a  concentrated  state  where  the 
mind is clear and calm. 
8. samãdhi – spiritual  experience  of  the  union  with Bhagvãn,  which  is  the 
highest level of yog. 
 
 
 
The four stages of life (ãshram) 
A  person  passes  through  four stages  of  life,  called ãshrams.  They  each  have 
different duties and responsibilities. 
 
 brahm-chãrya – when a person fulfils his duty as a student and brahm-chãri 
 grahastha – when  a  person  enters  married  life  to  fulfil  the  duties  of  a 
householder 
 vãnprasth – when  a person  withdraws  from  some  social  duties  and  serves 
merely as an elderly advisor 
 sannyãs – when a person abandons all worldly duties and lives as a tyãgi 
 
 
The two wings of satsang 
 
 ãgnã – following the commands of Bhagvãn and His sant 
 upãsanã – a firm belief and worship of the sãkãr svarup of Bhagvãn 
 
 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 886 - 
The four social classes (varna) 
All  Hindus  are  divided  into  four  castes.    A  person  must  follow  the dharma of 
their own varna, and should not follow the dharma of another varna. 
 
 brãhman – priest ; a  religious  and  educated  person  traditionally  assigned 
duties of worship, performing rites and rituals, and teaching. 
 kshatriya – warrior ;   a   person   of   power   and   courage,   traditionally 
responsible for  both the formation and enforcement of law within society, 
as well as its safety.  
 vaishya – merchant;  businessman  or  employer  traditionally  dealing  with 
financial and commercial matters in society. 
 shudra – labourer;  skilled  worker  traditionally  serving  the  other  three 
varnas  
 
 
The twenty-nine vrats 
These vrats must  be  kept  by  all bhaktas.    These vrats are  kept  by  Vaishnavs, 
which means ‘twenty-nine; vish-nav’.  
 
 Janmãshtami – the birthday of Shree Krishna 
 Rãmnavmi/Swãminãrãyan  Jayanti – the  birthday  of Shree  Rãm;  and  the 
birthday of Shree Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn 
 Shivrãtri – the  day Shiv returns  to Kailãs,  after  staying in  Pãtãl  four  months 
with Bali Rãjã  
 Vãman Jayanti – the birthday of Shree Vãman 
 Nrusinh Jayanti – the birthday of Shree Nrusinh 
 The 24 Ekãdashi – the eleventh day of the bright and dark halves of the lunar 
month 
 
 
The three qualities of a true satsangi 
 
 niyam – to   follow moral,   spiritual,   and   religious   codes   of   conduct 
prescribed by Bhagvãn or the shãstras 
 nishchay – to  have  unfaltering  faith  in Bhagvãn,  no  matter  what  is  seen or 
heard 
 paksh – to be loyal to Bhagvãn and His bhaktas 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 887 - 
Extra niyams of chãtur-mãs 
During  the  monsoon  season  (chatur-mãs),  a bhakta must  take  extra niyams.  
These are prescribed by Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn in the Shikshãpatri. 
 
 listen to kathãs 
 read kathãs 
 sing kirtans 
 perform a mahã-pujã and the abhishek of Bhagvãn 
 reciting of a mantra  
 reciting of a stotra 
 pradikshanã of the murti of Bhagvãn 
 dandvat pranãm 
 
 
Names Of Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn 
 
 Ghanshyãm – given by Bhakti-Mãtã 
 Hari – given by Mãrkandey Rushi 
 Krishna - given by Mãrkandey Rushi 
 Hari-Krishna - given by Mãrkandey Rushi 
 Nilkanth - given by Mãrkandey Rushi 
 Sahajãnand Swãmi – given by Rãmãnand Swãmi 
 Nãrãyan Muni – given by Rãmãnand Swãmi 
 Swãminãrãyan - – given Himself 
 
 
Items taken on van-vicharan 
Swãminãrãyan  Bhagvãn travelled  all  over  India  for  seven  years,  between  the 
age  of  eleven  and  eighteen.    He  established dharma and  destroyed adharma.  
He carried eleven items with Him: 
 
 mrug-charma – deerskin 
 munj-mekhlã – a grass rope worn around the waist to tie a loin-cloth 
 kamandalu – wooden water pot with a handle 
 batvo – a small box to keep shãligrãms and Bãl-Mukund 
 palãs – a T-shaped wooden stick used as a hand-rest 
 gutko – small notebook containing summaries of shãstras 
 gãranu – cotton cloth to filter water 
 mãlã – rosary 
 bhikshã-pãtra – bowl for alms 
 yagnopavit – sacred thread worn from left shoulder to waist 
 tulsi kanthi – double-threaded necklace made of tulsi beads 
 
 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 888 - 
The major pilgrimage places visited by Nilkanth Varni on van-vicharan 
 
 Pulãshram (Mukti-Nãth) 
 Shirpur 
 Nav-Lakhã Mountain 
 Bãlvã-Kund 
 Kapil-Ãshram 
 Jagan-Nãth-Puri 
 Shiv Kanchi 
 Vishnu Kanchi 
 Shree-Rang Kshetra 
 Setubhandh Rãmeshvar 
 Bhut-Puri 
 Kumãrikã  
 Padmanãbh 
 Janãrdan 
 Ãdi Keshav 
 Pandharpur 
 Dand-Kãranya 
 Nãsikpur 
 Trambakeshvar 
 River Tãpi 
 River Narmadã 
 River Mahi 
 River Sãbarmati 
 Bhim-Nãth 
 
 
The six mandirs 
Six  mandirs  were  constructed  by  the  wish  of Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn,  and  He 
installed the murtis Himself. 
 
Place Murti Year Head of Construction 
Amdãvãd Nar-Nãrãyan Dev VS 1878  Ãnandãnand Swãmi 
Bhuj Nar-Nãrãyan Dev VS 1879  Vaishnavãnand Swãmi 
Vadtãl Lakshmi-Nãrãyan Dev VS 1881  Brahmãnand Swãmi 
Dholerã Madan-Mohanji Mahãrãj VS 1882  Nishkulãnand Swãmi 
Junãgadh Rãdhã-Raman Dev VS 1884  Brahmãnand Swãmi 
Gadhadã Gopinãthji Mahãrãj VS 1885  Viraktãnand Swãmi 
 
 
The five authors of the Vachanãmrut 
The  Vachanãmrut  contains  the  words  spoken  by Swãminãrãyan  Bhagvãn.  
However,  it  was  written  and  compiled  by  five sants,  after  hours  of  listening, 
remembering, and writing.  
 
 Muktãnand Swami 
 Gopãlãnand Swami 
 Nityãnand Swami 
 Shukãnand Swãmi 
 Brahmãnand Swami 
 
After  each sabhã,  the sants would  write  down  the  discussions  of  the sabhã.  
They  would  then  merge  their  scripts,  to  finally  create  one  final  manuscript.  
Even    though Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn held    thousands    of sabhãs,    the 
discussions from only 273 are included in the Vachanãmrut. 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 889 - 
The eight body parts of ashtãng dandvat pranãm 
Men perform ashtãng pranãm with eight parts of their body, whereas women 
perform panchãng pranãm with  five  parts  of  the  body.    These  body  parts  are 
offered to Bhagvãn when bowing before Him. 
 
ashtãng-pranãm 
 feet  
 hands 
 thighs  
 chest 
 head  
 eyes 
 mind  
 speech  
panchãng pranãm 
 head 
 hands  
 feet  
 mind  
 speech 
 
 
 
 
The five ãrti of the day 
 
 mangalã – performed before sunrise, when Bhagvãn wakes up 
 shangãr – performed after Bhagvãn is dressed 
 rãjbhog – performed before lunch 
 sandhyã – performed after sunset 
 shayan – performed before bedtime 
 
 
The five parts of panch-amrut 
A mixture of five items is used in pujã and for the abhishek of Bhagvãn. 
 
 dudh – milk 
 dahi – yoghurt 
 ghee – pure butter 
 madh – honey 
 sãkãr – sugar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 890 - 
The thirty-nine characteristics of Bhagvãn as a king 
 
1. satya – truthfulness; kindness to all beings 
2. sauch – inner purity; flawlessness 
3. dayã – compassion; intolerance of the pain of others 
4. kshãnti – patience; tolerance of contempt from enemies 
5. tyãg – renunciation; abandoning all things 
6. santosh – happiness; free from impatience 
7. ãrjav – sincerity; honesty; harmonising of mind, speech, and body 
8. sham – tranquillity 
9. dam – self-control; restraint of outer sense organs 
10. tap – strictness 
11. sãmya – equality; equal behaviour with friends and foe 
12. titikshã – endurance; withstanding comforts and hardships 
13. uparati – self-discipline; refraining from unnecessary activities 
14. shrut – learning; knowledge of precise meanings of the shãstras 
15. gnãn – knowledge useful in helping a mumukshu  attain the pleasant and 
avoid the unpleasant 
16. virakti –repulsion towards the pleasures of the senses 
17. aishvarya – power; control over all things 
18. shaurya – valour; courage in battle 
19. tej – brilliance; resistance to defeat 
20. bal – strength; power to govern all beings 
21. smruti – memory; remembering of bhaktas 
22. svãtantrya – independence 
23. kaushal – skilled 
24. kãnti – splendour 
25. dhairya – courage 
26. mãrdav – gentleness 
27. prãgalbhya – maturity 
28. prasharay – courteous; polite 
29. sheel – pure 
30. saha – strength; force 
31. ojas – vitality; energetic 
32. bal – strength; power to support all things 
33. bhag – excellence 
34. gãmbheerya – wisdom 
35. sthairya – stability 
36. ãstikya – faith in Bhagvãn and shãstras 
37. keerti – glory; fame 
38. mãn – self-respect 
39. anahankruti – without ego; humility 
 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 891 - 
The thirty characteristics of a sãdhu 
 
1. krupãlu – selflessly showers grace upon others 
2. sarvedehinãm akrutadroh – does not harm any living being 
3. titikshu – remains  dignified  in  all situations – during  praise  and  insult, 
happiness and misery 
4. satyasãr – strength comes from satya 
5. anavadhyãtmã – devoid of jealousy or other such vices 
6. sam – views others with equality 
7. sarvopakãrak – does only good to others 
8. kãmairahatadhihi – not disturbed by indulging in vishays 
9. dãnt – indriyas are restrained  
10. mrudu – gentle-natured 
11. shuchi – inner and outer purity 
12. akinchan – without any worldly desires 
13. aniha – without any desires for worldly gains 
14. mitabhuk – eats in moderation 
15. shãnt –  mind is restrained 
16. sthir – composure 
17. machharan – only refuge is Bhagvãn 
18. muni – has noble thoughts 
19. apramatta – aware 
20. gambhriãtmã – motives are beyond our understanding 
21. dhrutimãn – patient even in difficult circumstances 
22. jitashadgun – one who has defeated:  thirst, hunger, grief, infatuation, old 
age, and death 
23. amãni – humility 
24. mãnad – can praise others 
25. kalp – ability to speak for the benefit others 
26. maitra – does not deceive others 
27. kãrunik – compassionate without any selfish motive 
28. kavi – fully knows the sthãvar, the jangam, and Bhagvãn 
29. worships Bhagvãn 
30. has  single-minded  worship  with  the  realisation  of Bhagvãn in  His  true 
glory 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 892 - 
The chihn on the feet of Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn 
 
Right Foot  
jav A barley grain; located on the right toe.  Performing dhyãn on this 
chihn destroys all sins, purifies the mind, and grants a person with 
the  knowledge  of ãtmã and Paramãtmã.    It  also  grants  worldly 
wealth and comforts. 
jãmbu A  berry.    Performing dhyãn on  this chihn ensures  that  a bhakta 
loses  interest  in  everything  else  and  feels  that  all  worldly  affairs 
are worthless. 
vajra The vajra is  a  weapon  as  long  as  a trident which  is  carried  by 
Indra.   Performing dhyãn on  this chihn helps  a bhakta overcome 
his inner enemies, and removes the desires for material pleasures, 
which enables the mind to focus on Bhagvãn. 
urdhva- 
rekhã 
Line.   This chihn runs  from the space  between the big toe and the 
first  toe  to  the  heel  of  the  right  foot.   Performing dhyãn on  this 
chihn spiritually   elevates   the   mind   and   takes   the bhakta to 
Akshardhãm. 
dhvaj A  flag.    A  flag  sits  above  a mandir,  and  is  also  carried  by  the  chief 
warrior  of  an  army.    A  flag  also  symbolises  victory.   Performing 
dhyãn on this chihn leads a bhakta to live by the ãgnã of Bhagvãn, 
just as a flag flutters according to the direction of the wind.  It also 
helps a bhakta overcome lust and other material desires. 
kamal A  lotus.   Performing dhyãn on  this chihn enables  a bhakta to 
remain   free   of   material   attachments   and   focus   his   mind   on 
Bhagvãn.  Just as a kamal is able to blossom even in muddy water, 
similarly,  a bhakta is  able  to  remain  free  of  material  attachments, 
despite  fulfilling  all  his  worldly  duties  obligations.   Also,  just  as  a 
kamal does not sink into water, a bhakta is not submerged by  the 
forces of inner enemies, attachments, and material pleasures. 
ankush An  instrument  used  to  control  an  elephant.   Performing dhyãn on 
this chihn enables  a bhakta to  control  his  mind,  and  to  become 
strong in worshipping Bhagvãn. 
ashtakon An  octagon.    Performing dhyãn on  this chihn grants  a bhakta the 
fruits   of ashtãng-yog.      He   also   attains Akshardhãm,   which   is 
beyond the eight barriers. 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 893 - 
svastik This sacred sign symbolises the focusing of Bhagvãn’s energy from 
all  four  directions  to  the  centre.   Performing dhyãn on  this chihn 
grants the bhakta a happy life free of misery, and good luck. 
  
Left Foot  
matsya A  fish.   Performing dhyãn on  this chihn grants  a bhakta with  a 
stable  mind.    It  also  empowers  him  to  live  life  absorbed  in  the 
murti of Bhagvãn. 
trikon A triangle.  Performing dhyãn on this chihn frees a bhakta from the 
bondage  and  the  three  bodies – sthul,  sukshma,  kãran; and  the 
three mental states – jãgrat, svapna; sushupti.  He becomes brahm-
rup. 
gaupad A cow’s footprint.  Performing dhyãn on this chihn causes the vast 
material world to become the size of a cow’s hoof. 
dhanush A  bow;  symbolises  humility  and  strength.   Performing dhyãn on 
this chihn makes  a bhakta humble,  wise,  polite,  and  fearless.    It 
also enables him to overcome inner enemies. 
vyom Space  (ãkãsh);  present  in pruthvi, jal, tej,  and vãyu,  but  it  remains 
unaffected  by  them.  Similarly,  a bhakta performing dhyãn on  this 
chihn remains  detached  from  the  material  world,  and Bhagvãn 
resides within the purified space of his heart (hruday-ãkãsh).  
ardha-
chandra 
Half  moon.    The  moon  symbolises  peace.    A bhakta performing 
dhyãn on this chihn overcomes all miseries and  experiences inner 
peace   and   profound   happiness.      Also,   just   as   the   night-lotus 
blossoms  due  to  the  light  of  the  moon,  the bhakta blossoms  with 
bhakti and shraddhã through the light of Bhagvãn. 
kalash A  brass  water-pot.    By performing dhyãn on  this chihn a bhakta 
attains total fulfilment and becomes akshar-rup.  A kalash occupies 
the  highest  point  on  the shikhar of  a mandir, and  so  the bhakta 
attains the highest dhãm, Akshardhãm. 

Appendix B – Biography Of Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn 
 
- 894 - 
The Purpose Of His Avatãr 
 
Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn incarnated on earth, along with His dhãm and some of 
His muktas,  to  establish ekãntik dharma,  and  grant kalyãn to  those  who 
became  His bhaktas.  He  incarnated  at  Dharma-Dev’s house in Chhapaiyã in 
Kaushal-Desh,  to  save  Bhakti-Mãtã  and Dharma-Dev  from  harassment  by 
demons.    He  also  incarnated  to  take mumukshu bhaktas to Akshardhãm,  by 
imparting knowledge of His svarup, dharma, vairãgya, and bhakti. 
 
While  on  earth,  He established ekãntik dharma,  which  had  been  destroyed 
many years ago, and He destroyed adharma.  He initiated over 2000 sãdhus, of 
which  500  were  initiated  as paramhans.    Also,  He  built mandirs,  and  installed 
murtis,  which  will  always  remain  on  earth.   In  this  way, Bhagvãn forever 
resides  on  this  earth  through  His sãdhus and  His murtis.   Swãminãrãyan 
Bhagvãn also wrote and narrated shãstras, authenticated ancient shãstras, and 
instructed His sãdhus to write shãstras. 
 
Birth Name: Ghanshyãm (given by Bhakti-Mãtã) 
 
Other Names:  Hari, Krishna, Hari-Krishna, Nilkanth  
  (given by Mãrkandey Rushi in Chhapaiyã) 
 Sahajãnand Swãmi, Nãrãyan Muni 
  (given by Rãmãnand Swãmi in Piplãnã) 
 Swãminãrãyan 
  (given by Himself in Faneni) 
 Shreeji Mahãrãj 
  (given by His bhaktas) 
 
Birth Date:  Chaitra sud 9, VS 1837 (2
nd
 April 1781) - Rãmnavmi 
Birthplace: Chhapaiyã, near Ayodhyã in Kaushal-Desh 
 (later moved to Ayodhyã) 
 
Father’s Name:  Dharma-Dev (Dev-Sharma) 
 (son of Bãl-Sharma and Bhãgyavati) 
Father’s Birth Date: Kãrtik sud 11, VS 1796 
Father’s Birthplace: Itãr 
 
Mother’s Name: Bhakti-Mãtã (Bãlã, Premvati) 
 (daughter of Krishna-Sharma and Bhavãni) 
Mother’s Birth Date: Kãrtik sud 15, VS 1798 
Mother’s Birthplace: Chhapaiyã 
 
 

Appendix B – Biography Of Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn 
 
- 895 - 
Brothers: Rãmpratãpji (married to Suvãsini-Bãi) 
 Ichhãrãmji (married to Variyãri-Bãi) 
 
Varna: Sarvariya Brahman 
Family Ved: Sãm Ved, Kauthmi Shãkhã 
 
Guru: Rãmãnand Swami 
 
 
Van-Vicharan 
Start date: Ãshãdh sud 10, VS 1849 – the day he left Ayodhyã 
Age at start:  11 years, 3 months, and 1 day 
Place: Ayodhyã 
 
Length of van-vicharan:  7 years, 1 month, and 11 days 
 
End date:  Shrãvan vad 6, VS 1856 
Age at end:  18 years, 4 months, and 12 days 
Place: Loj    
 
 
Bhãgvati Dikshã 
Age: 19 years, 7 months, and 2 days 
Date: Kãrtik sud 11, VS 1857 
Place: Piplãnã 
 
 
Head Of The Sampradãy 
Age: 20 years, 7 months, and 2 days 
Date: Kãrtik sud 11, VS 1858  
Place: Jetpur 
 
 
Satsang 
Years in satsang: 30 years, 9 months, and 19 days  
 
Time on earth: 49 years, 2 months, and 1 day 
Date He left earth: Jyeshth sud 10, VS 1886 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendix B – Biography Of Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn 
 
- 896 - 
Accomplishments On Earth 
 
 Established ekãntik dharma, and destroyed adharma 
 Initiated over 2000 sãdhus, of which 500 were initiated as paramhans  - He 
remains on earth through these sãdhus 
 Built mandirs, and installed murtis for bhaktas to always have the darshan 
of Bhagvãn’s murti  
 Established two seats of leadership (gãdi), and two ãchãryas to protect and 
promote the sampradãy 
 Revealed the philosophy of the Veds in simple words 
 Wrote shãstras, and authenticated ancient shãstras, and shãstras written by 
His sãdhus 
 Summarised the essence of all the shãstras in the Shikshãpatri 
 
 Worked to assist the poor by distributing food and drinking water  
 Opened charity-houses for the poor 
 Organised food and water aid for people during times of drought 
 
 Stopped the practice of sati, as it was suicide/murder (some were forced) – 
human life is only given and taken by Bhagvãn 
 Stopped female infanticide (killing of baby girls) 
 Encouraged the bhaktas to educate females, which meant they were able to 
give talks about Bhagvãn 
 Stopped the sacrifice of animals in yagnas 
 
 Allowed   members   from   all varnas (castes)   into   the   Swãminãrãyan 
Sampradãy;  He instructed His paramhans to collect alms from all sections 
of  society  and  appointed  people  from  the  lower varnas of  society  as  His 
personal   attendants;   He   ate   along   with   members   of   lower varnas.  
However, taking food from members of lower varnas was not supported by 
Him. 
 
 Dispelled  the  myth  that moksh was  not  attainable  by  everyone.    He  taught 
mumukshu bhaktas that the jeev is  neither  male  nor  female  and  that 
everyone is equal in the eyes of Bhagvãn 
 
 Had  good  relationships  with  the  British  Imperial  Government,  so  they 
gifted Him with land to build a mandir in Amdãvãd 
 Maintained   good   relationships   with   people   of   other religions;   had 
followers  from  other  religions;  even  though  some  of  His  attendents were 
Muslims, they wore a kanthi and followed the panch-vartmãn 
 Gave the Governor of Bombay, Sir john Malcolm, a copy of the Shikshãpatri 
(is kept in Bodleian Library in Oxford) 
 

Appendix C – Introductory Paragraphs 
- 897 - 
The  introductory  paragraph  of  each  Vachanãmrut  begins  with  the  date  and 
location,  which takes  the  reader  back in  time  to  the  exact  environment  in 
which  the sabhãs were  held.    This  is  followed  by  a  detailed  description  of 
Shreeji Mahãrãj’s svarup,  which allows  the  readers  and  listeners  to visualise 
Him   sitting   in   the sabhã,   giving   His   spiritual   talks   to   the sãdhus and 
haribhaktas. 
 
Garments 
 
Garment Description 
angarkhu A long-sleeved,  upper  garment  that  is  made  of  a  thin  cloth.  It 
reaches  down  to  the  knees,  and  is  tied  with  strings  on  the  left 
side of the chest. 
bokãni Cloth tied around the head, with one end crossing from under the 
chin to cover the ears and cheeks. 
chãdar A thin blanket. 
dagli Waistcoat   with   inner   lining.   Shorter   and   thicker   than   an 
angarkhu. 
dhoti An  unstitched,  long  piece  of  cloth  traditionally  worn  by  males  as 
a  lower  garment.    It  is  usually  wound  around  the  waist  with  one 
end tucked in after passing it between the legs. 
feto Long piece of cloth that can be twisted and tied around the head, 
or placed over the shoulder and tied around the waist. 
jãmo A long-sleeved, upper garment that is made of a thick cloth, with 
rich  embroidery.  It  reaches down  below  the  knees,  and  is  tied  at 
the waist with long strings. 
khes Piece  of  cloth  that  can  be  worn  as  a  shawl  to  cover  the  upper 
body, or worn as a dhoti to cover the lower body. 
pãgh Turban. Long, thin piece of cloth tied around the head.. 
rajãi Thick blanket. 
reto Feto, moliyu or shelu with  silky,  decorative  edges  woven  with 
golden or silver threads.  Tied around the head or waist, or left to 
rest upon the shoulders. 
shelu Rich fabric with a silky finish woven with golden or silver threads 
and decorative  edges.      It  is  worn  as  an  upper  garment  or  tied 
around the head or waist, or even left to rest upon the shoulders. 
survãl Loose trousers. 
 
 

Appendix C – Introductory Paragraphs 
- 898 - 
Garments worn in cold weather 
Mahãrãj wore warm clothes during the winter.  For example, during the kathã 
in Gadhadã I – 24, He wore a warm dagli.  Also, in Loyã 1, Loyã 3, and Loyã 7, 
Shreeji Mahãrãj wore a cotton-padded survãl.  From all the garments worn by 
Shreeji   Mahãrãj,   we   can   deduce    that   the   three    coldest   days   in   the 
Vachanãmrut may have been in Loyã, as Mahãrãj wore double layers on top of 
His warm dagli. 
 
The three coldest days: 
Loyã Day Garments 
15 Mãgshar vad 13 
a  warm dagli, khes, feto around  His  head,  tied  a 
bokãni with  another feto,  covered  Himself chofãl 
and a pachhedi 
17 
Mãgshar vad 
Amãs 
a warm dagli with an angarkhu inside, khes, tied a 
feto around  his  head,  tied bokãni with  another 
feto, covered Himself chofãl and a rajãi 
18 Posh sud 1 
a  warm dagli, khes,    tied  a feto around  his  head, 
tied bokãni with  another feto,  covered  Himself 
chofãl and a rajãi 
 
Notes: 
 As Shreeji Mahãrãj possessed intense vairãgya,  He preferred simple white 
clothing. 
 
 Shreeji Mahãrãj generally wore a dhoti, referred to as a khes.  A white dhoti 
is  only  mentioned twice in  the  Vachanãmrut,  in  Gadhadã  II – 34 and  in 
Jetalpur – 5. 
 
 He rarely wore a survãl, but when He did, He preferred a white one, rather 
than  one  made  of kinkhãb.    He  only  wore  a kinkhãb  survãl when  it  was 
presented by a loving bhakta. 
 
 He  rarely  wore  an angarkhu, dagli,  or jãmo.    He  usually  draped  one  of  the 
following garments on His upper body: thin cotton cloth, thick cotton cloth, 
chãdar, khes, reto, or shelu. 
 
 Shreeji Mahãrãj rarely wore rich garments with embroidery. 
 
 He wore a white, English-milled cloth during the kathã in Gadhadã III – 31. 
 
 

Appendix C – Introductory Paragraphs 
- 899 - 
Adornments 
 
The paramhans and bhaktas often  adorned  Mahãrãj  with  various  items.  They 
offered  Him   flowers,  hung  garlands  around  His  neck,  placed  bunches  of 
flowers above His ears or inserted them into His pãgh, hung tassels of flowers 
from His pãgh, and tied strings of flowers to His wrists and arms. 
 
Adornments Vachanãmrut 
berkhã (string   of   flowers 
tied to the wrist) 
Gadhadã I – 30 
bãjubandh and gajarã Vadtãl – 1, Amdãvãd – 2, 4, Gadhadã III – 1, 3, 5, 9 
guchh (bunches  of flowers 
placed above the ears) 
Gadhadã 1 – 12, 20, 22, 34, 36, 37, 39, 41, 42, 43 
Sãrangpur 14, Gadhadã II – 21, 32, Vadtãl – 5 (two on 
each ear) 
Amdãvãd – 1, 4, 6, Jetalpur – 3 
both torã and     garlands 
hanging on Mahãrãj’s pãgh 
Gadhadã I – 62, Gadhadã II – 49, Amdãvãd – 3 
held in the hands: 
- gajarã 
- large bunch of roses 
- bunch of flowers 
- a ball of flowers 
- sevati flower in right hand 
- pomegranate 
- lemon 
- handkerchief 
- tulsi mãlã 
 
Gadhadã I – 49 
Amdãvãd – 6 
Gadhadã I – 14 
Gadhadã I – 36 
Gadhadã I – 14 
Vadtãl – 13, Jetalpur – 3  
Jetalpur 1, 3 
Jetalpur – 2 
Gadhadã I –70, Panchãlã –4, Amdãvãd –5, Jetalpur –2 
 tulsi kanthi Gadhadã I – 64, Gadhadã II – 48 
rãkhadis Gadhadã II – 9 
(Shrãvan sud 14, one day before Rakshã Bandhan) 
pearl    necklace    and    pearl 
tassels hanging from pãgh 
Gadhadã I – 13 
sandalwood  paste  smeared 
on forehead 
Gadhadã I – 32, 59 
sandalwood  paste  smeared 
on whole body 
Jetalpur – 4 
 
 
 

Appendix C – Introductory Paragraphs 
- 900 - 
Flowers Vachanãmrut 
chameli Vadtãl – 20, Amdãvãd – 3, 6, Jetalpur – 3 
mogrã Gadhadã II – 21, 24, 54, 61, Gadhadã III – 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 13, 15, 16, 
19 
dolariyã Jetalpur 1, 2, 3 
gulãb Gadhadã I – 14, 63, Vadtãl 1, 3, 5, 12, Amdãvãd 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 
hajãri Jetalpur – 3 
borsali Jetalpur – 3 
guldãvadi/sevati Gadhadã  I – 14,  22,  26,  Kãriyãni – 11,  Gadhadã  II – 27,  66, 
Jetalpur – 1, 3, 4 
champã Vadtãl – 2, Jetalpur – 3 
karnikãr Gadhadã I – 36, Gadhadã II – 14, Gadhadã III – 19 
 
Notes: 
 There  are  no  flowers  in  the  Panchãlã sabhãs,  either  because  the  area  was 
not  fertile  enough  for  growing  flowers  or  the  weather  in Fãgan was  not 
warm enough for flowers to grow. 
 
 There  are  no  flowers  in  the  Loyã sabhãs.    This  may  be  due  to  the  cold 
winter.  Also, there are no flowers in winter months of Gadhadã II, until the 
month Chaitra. 
 
 The rose only appears twice in the sabhãs in Gadhadã.  Roses probably did 
not  grow  in  the  Saurãshtra  region.    So,  the  roses  in  the  two sabhãs may 
have  been  brought  by bhaktas visiting  from  other  regions.    All  the  other 
references  to  roses  occur  in  the  Gujarat sabhãs (Vadtãl  and  Amdãvãd).    In 
the Amdãvãd sabhãs, Mahãrãj adorns roses in the form of torã, bãjubandh, 
guchh, and garlands. 
 
 The dolariyã flower only appears in the Jetalpur kathãs. 
 
 In  Jetalpur  3,  Mahãrãj  adorns  six  varieties  of  flowers: champã, borsali, 
guldãvadi, chameli, dolariyã,  and hajãri,  in  addition  to  holding  a  lemon  in 
one hand and a pomegranate in the other. 
 
 Sandalwood  paste  is  usually  applied  during  the  summer  months  for  its 
cooling  effect.    In  the  Vachanãmrut,  it  was  smeared  on  Mahãrãj  three 
times: one during the month of Posh, and twice during the month of Fãgan.  
Both  months  have  low  temperatures,  with Posh being  colder  than Fãgan.  
Therefore, Mahãrãj may have accepted the sandalwood from a great sãdhu 
or a devout bhakta, as it is only soothing during the summer months. 

 
 
 
 
-
 
901
 
-
 
Place 
 
 
Number 
of 
Chapters 
Talks 
given by 
Shreeji 
Mahãrãj 
of His 
own 
accord 
NUMBER OF QUESTIONS ASKED 
Shreeji Mahãrãj
 
Muktãnand
 
Swãmi
 
Gop
ã
l
ã
nand
 
Swami
 
Nityãnand
 
Sw
ã
mi
 
Shuk
ã
nand
 
Sw
ã
mi
 
Brahmãnand
 
Swami
 
Other Sant
 
Ayodhya Prasadji
 
Mahãrãj
 
Raghuvirji
 
Mahãrãj
 
Haribhaktas
 
Gadhadã I 78 40 22 32 5 4 3 8 41 - - 17 
Sãrangpur 18 6 4 12 - 4 - - 15 - - 2 
Kãriyãni 12 5 7 5 2 3 - 2 8 - - 2 
Loyã 18 3 47 8 2 - 3 3 15 - - 1 
Panchãlã 7 5 1 - - - - - 2 - - 1 
Gadhadã II 67 46 31 17 - 2 2 2 8 1 1 3 
Vadtãl 20 5 8 4 1 1 1 1 - - - 11 
Amdãvãd 8 3 3 1 - - 1 - - - - 7 
Ashlãli 1 1 - - - - - - - - - - 
Jetalpur 5 4 1 1 - - - 1 - - - 1 
Gadhadã III 39 44 17 11 1 - 11 - 7 1 1 6 
Appendix 
D
 
–
 
Questions
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Purushottam 
Akshar 
mukta mukta 
mukta mukta mukta mukta 
mukta mukta 
Mul-Purush 
(mukta) 
Mul-Prakruti 
(Mahã-Mãyã) 
mukta 
Pradhãn-Purush 
maha-tattva 
(chitt) 
Appendix 
E
 
–
 
Creation
 

 
 
 
-
 
903
 
-
 
sãttvik-ahankãr rãjas-ahankãr tãmas-ahankãr 
Virat Purush 
(24 tattvas) 
Brahmã 
Marichi Prajãpati 
Kashyap Prajãpati 
devs 
humans, animals, 
trees, mountains 
demons 
man 
devs of the indriyas 
ten indriyas 
buddhi 
prãns 
five bhut 
five tanmãtrãs (vishays) 

 
 
-
 
904
 
-
 
     
 
 
      
 
 
      
  
10 – Svarg-Lok 
9 – Bhuvar-Lok 
7 – Atal 
6 - Vital 
5 - Sutal 
4 - Talãtal 
3 – Mahãtal 
8 – Mrutyu-Lok 
2 – Rasãtal 
1 – Pãtãl 
Night (12 hours) 
Nimit-Pralay 
(lower ten loks 
are destroyed) 
365 
DAYS 
Brahmã 
(100-year lifespan) 
12 HOURS 
                    
  
  
  
  
  
    
1                                                                        12 
100 
YEARS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 
F
 
–
 
Time Scale
 

 
 
-
 
905
 
-
 
 
 Brahmã lives  for  100  years  (3.1536  x  10
14
 human  years).  Each  year  is  made  up  of  365 days.    At  the  end  of  his  100-year  lifespan, 
prãkrut-pralay occurs,  in  which  the  whole brahmãnd (the  14 loks)  is  destroyed.    A  new brahmãnd is  then  created,  with  a  new 
Brahmã. 
 
 Brahmã’s whole day is made up of 24 hours: a 12-hour day and a 12-hour night (8.64 x 10
9
 human years). 
 
 During Brahmã’s day, the lower 10 loks of the brahmãnd are created; and they are destroyed during the night.  This is called nimit-
pralay.  The lower 10 loks are then created the next day. (The upper four loks are created during Brahmã’s first day, and they are 
not destroyed until Brahmã dies, and prãkrut-pralay occurs) 
 
 During Brahma’s 12-hour day (4.32 x 10
9
 human years), 14 Manus and Indras reign and die, and 1000 Mahã-Yugs (chokadis) occur. 
 
 A chokadi is  the  passing  of  four yugs: Satya-Yug lasts  for  1,728,000  human  years; Tretã-Yug lasts  for  1,296,000  human  years; 
Dvãpar-Yug lasts for 864,000 human years; and Kali-Yug lasts for 432,000 human years.  This means one chokadi is completed in 
4,320,000 human years.  Therefore, 1000 Mahã-Yugs occur during one day of Brahmã.  The destruction that occurs during the day 
of Brahmã is called nitya-pralay. 
 
1000 Mahã-Yug 
(chokadi) 
3 1 
2 
500 
1000 
998 
999 
Satya-Yug 
1,728,000 human years 
Tretã-Yug 
1,296,000 human years 
Dvãpar-Yug 
864,000 human years 
Kali-Yug 
432,000 human years 

Appendix G – Conversion of Measurements 
 
- 906 - 
 In   the    Vachanãmrut, Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn has    referred   to   various 
measurements  of  time  using  traditional  Hindu  time  scales.    Below  is  a  list  of 
Indian time measurements with modern conversion equivalents.  
 
1 krati 34,000
th
 of a second 
1 truti 300
th
 of a second 
2 truti 1 luv (1/150 of a second) 
2 lav 1 kshan (1/75 of  a second) 
30 kshan  1 nimish (2/5 of a second) 
60 nimish 1 pal (24 second) 
60 pal 1 ghadi (24 minutes) 
2.5 ghadi 1 horã (1 hour) 
24 horã 1 diwas (1 day) 
7 diwas 1 saptãsh (1 week) 
4 saptã 1 mãs (1 month) 
2 mãs 1 rutu (1 season) 
6 rutu 1 varsh (1 year) 
100 varsh 1 shatãbda (1 century) 
10 shatãbda 1 sahasrãbda (1,000 years) 
432 sahasrãbda 1 yug (length of Kali-Yug, 432,000 years) 
2 yug 1 Dvãpar-Yug (864,000 years) 
3 yug 1 Tretã-Yug (1,296,000 years) 
4 yug 1 Satya-Yug (1,728,000 years) 
10 yug 1 Mahã-Yug = 1 chokdi (4,320,000 years) 
1000 mahã-yug 1 kalp (4,320,000,000 years) 
1 kalp 4.32 billion years 
 
 
 

Appendix H – Hindu Calendar 
 
- 907 - 
 The Hindu  calendar  year  is  based  on  the  Vikram  era,  after  King  Vikram  of 
Ujjain.    The  system  is  still  widely  used  in  Northern  and  Western  India.    The 
calendar began in 57-56 BCE. 
 
 The  twelve  months  of  the  year  are  lunar-based,  where  each  month is divided 
into the bright half (waxing of the moon), known as the ‘shukla’ or ‘sud’, and 
the dark half (waning of the moon), known as the ‘krishna’ or ‘vad paksh’.  The 
15
th
 day  of  the sud half  (full  moon),  is  known  as Punam,  while  the  last  day  of 
vad half (new moon), is known Amãs. 
 
In  Northern  India,  the  months  end  on  the  day  of  the  full  moon,  while  in 
Gujarãt,  the  months  end  on  Amãs,  the  darkest  night.   The lunar  calendar, is 
approximately   354   days   long.      To   keep   it synchronised   with   the   solar 
calendar,  in  which  years  are  approximately  365  days  long,  adjustments are 
made to the lunar-based calendar every 2.5 years.  This is achieved by adding 
an additional month called an ‘adhik’ or ‘Purushottam’ month to the calendar. 
 
 In  Gujarãt,  the Kãrtiki Samvat is  used,  where the  new year begins  after  Divãli 
on Kãrtik sud 1.   The Ashãdhi Samvat still  prevails  in  some  parts  of Rãjasthãn 
and Gujarãt – in Kutch and Saurãshtra.  In this system, the new year begins on 
Ashãdh sud 1.  The Vachanãmrut is written using the Ashãdhi Samvat. 
 
 The  Common  Era  year  corresponding  to  the Samvat year  is  obtained  by 
subtracting  57  years  from  the  Vikram  year  if  the  date  falls  between Ãshãdh 
sud 1 and December 31
st
; and 56 years if the date falls between January 1
st
 and 
Jyeshtha vad 15. 

Appendix I – Months and Seasons 
 
- 908 - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Year’s Day of the Ashãdhi Samvat 
(Ashãdh sud 1) 
 
The Vachanãmrut is written using the 
Ashãdhi Samvat. 
Seasons 
Seasons 
New Year’s Day of the Kãrtiki Samvat 
(Kãrtik sud 1) 