is 
attached to Bhagvãn out of love?” 

GADHADÃ III 
- 715 - 
14.19 
Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “A person whose mind is attached to Bhagvãn 
out of love is the best.” 
 
14.20 
Then, Shivãnand Swãmi asked, “How can a bhakta of Bhagvãn who 
does  not  possess wisdom of  what  is  good  and  bad  as  described  by 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj,  and  who  also  lacks vairãgya,  develop  such  wisdom, 
and also develop vairãgya towards all objects other than Bhagvãn?” 
 
14.21 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If a person develops firm love for Bhagvãn 
from  the  initial  stages,  then  due  to  that  love, wisdom and vairãgya 
will  automatically  develop.    Now,  consider  the  following:    When  a 
person is attached to an object, it is called affection or desire.  Then, if 
someone were to obstruct the gaining of any object for which he has 
affection,  he  would  become  angry  on  that  person.    This  applies  not 
only to humans; even animals express such anger.  For example, due 
to  lust,  a  buffalo  that is  attached  to  a  female  buffalo  will  kill  another 
buffalo that approaches the female; this behaviour is widely observed 
in all types of animals.  In the same way, a person with deep love for 
Bhagvãn immediately  becomes  angry  on  any  object  that  acts  as  an 
obstruction  in  that  love  and  he  immediately  abandons  that  object.  
Therefore,  a  person  who  has  deep  love  for Bhagvãn automatically 
develops vairãgya as well as wisdom.” 
 
14.22 
Again, Shivãnand Swãmi asked, “Suppose there are two types of 
people, both  of  whom  are  intelligent.    Of  these,  one  possesses  faith 
and  accepts  whatever Bhagvãn says;  whereas  the other accepts  only 
those  words  of Bhagvãn that  he  feels  are  appropriate.    Of  the  two, 
who is better?” 
 
14.23 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “Only the person  who  possesses  faith  is 
better.   Rãmchandraji has  said  in  the  Rãmãyan, ‘I protect a person 
who  has  firm  faith  in  me – just  as  a  mother protects  her  child’.  
Therefore, only the person with faith is better.” 
 
14.24 
Then, Ãtmãnand Swãmi asked, “In a person’s mind, he is determined 
to  behave  according  to  the  wishes  of Bhagvãn for  the  rest  of  his  life.  

GADHADÃ III 
- 716 - 
However,  he  still  feels, ‘What can a person do for Bhagvãn and His 
sant to earn their trust?’” 
 
14.25 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  explained,  “Firstly,  a  person  earns  the trust   of 
Bhagvãn and His sant when he does not have hatred towards anyone 
and does not feel disheartened, even if he falls severely ill and is not 
cared for very well during that illness.  Secondly, even if he is harshly 
insulted by Bhagvãn and His sant without any fault of his own, he still 
does  not  have  hatred  towards  anyone.    Thirdly,  if  he  were  to  even 
slightly  disobey  his  observance  of  the niyams of  this satsang,  he 
would  feel  extremely  apologetic  and  would  immediately  perform 
prãyshchit.    Also,  even  if  he  were  to  entertain  an  evil  thought  in  his 
mind,  he  would  feel  just  as  apologetic  and  distressed  as  someone 
who  had  happened   to  physically   disobey   the  observance  of   the 
niyams.  A person with these characteristics earns the complete trust 
of Bhagvãn and His sant, and they feel, ‘This person will never fall back 
from satsang’.” 
 
14.26 
Then, Bhagvadãnand Swãmi asked, “How can others recognise a 
bhakta who continuously understands the greatness of Bhagvãn and 
His bhaktas in his mind?” 
 
14.27 
Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “A person who continuously understands 
the  greatness  of Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas in  his  mind  serves  them 
sincerely and lovingly.  He physically bows and touches the feet of all 
the sãdhus.  If a sãdhu were to fall ill, he would massage his head and 
feet  and  also  take  care  of  his  dietary  needs.    If  he  were  to  receive 
some object that he liked, he would first offer it to the sãdhus before 
using  it  for  himself.    A  person,  who  behaves  in  this  way  by  thought, 
word,  and  deed,  should  be  known  to  have  fully  understood  the 
greatness of Bhagvãn and His sant within his heart.” 
 
14.28 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  the sãdhus a question:  “A person may 
possess   intense dharma, gnãn, vairãgya,   and bhakti.      However 
sometimes,   there   may   be   some   relaxation   in   his   observance   of 

GADHADÃ III 
- 717 - 
dharma;  there  may  be  some  attachment  despite  having vairãgya; 
there  may  be  some  reduction  in  his bhakti;  and  attachment  to  his 
body  may  still  remain  despite  having gnãn.    What  can  be  the  reason 
for this?” 
 
14.29 
Gopãlãnand   Swãmi   and  Brahmãnand  Swãmi  replied,  “If  there 
appears to be a flaw in a person who possesses intense dharma, gnãn, 
vairãgya,  and bhakti – a  person  who  can  be  thought  of  as  being  as 
powerful as Bhagvãn Himself – it remains purely out of compassion; 
it is not a flaw.  In fact, when such a great person behaves with bãhya-
drashti,  he  transforms  many jeevs to  the  ranks  of  Jadbharat  and 
Shukji.    Therefore,  such  an  extremely  great  person  behaves  in  a 
worldly way purely out of compassion for the jeevs.” 
 
14.30 
Hearing their reply, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “That is precisely the 
correct answer to the question.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III || 14 || 248 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 15 
Applying Bandages To Wounds 
 
15.1 
In  the Samvat year  1884,  on Ashãdh vad 13  [21
st
 July  1827],  Swãmi 
Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in the balcony of the medi of 
His residence in Dãdã Khãchar's darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was dressed 
entirely  in  white  clothes  and  was  also  wearing  garlands  of mogrã 
flowers  around  His  neck.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
15.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said to Muktãnand Swãmi, “Today, I had a long 
talk with the bhaktas (Jeevu-Bã and Lãdu-Bã) who cook for me.” 
 
15.3 
Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, what did you talk about?” 

GADHADÃ III 
- 718 - 
15.4 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “The talk was that when a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn sits to perform the mãnsi pujã of Bhagvãn or sits to perform 
dhyãn upon Bhagvãn,  he  remembers  the  times  in  the  past  when  his 
jeev has  surrendered  to  the panch-vishays due  to  the  influence  of 
unpleasant  circumstances  or  the  influence  of  vicious  natures.    For 
example, a warrior who returns injured from the battlefield rests on 
a  bedstead  due  to  his  wound.    However,  until  his  wounds  are  not 
dressed  with  bandages,  the  pain  of  the  wounds  does  not  decrease 
and  he  is  not  able  to  sleep.    Only  when  bandages  are  applied  to  his 
wounds is he relieved of his pain and only then is he able to sleep.  In 
the same way, the jeev has been ‘wounded’ by the panch-vishays due 
to the influence of unpleasant desh, kãl, kriyã, and sang.  Whichever of 
the nine types of bhakti relieves the pain of these ‘wounds’ caused by 
the vishays and  makes  a  person  unaware  of  the vishays themselves, 
should be thought of as the application of a bandage to the ‘wounds’.  
Also,   that   particular   type   of bhakti should   be   known   to   be   his 
strength in worshipping Bhagvãn. 
 
15.5 
“Then, abiding by that particular strength, a person should engage in 
mãnsi pujã or  the  mental  chanting  of Bhagvãn’s name.    In  fact, 
whatever  he  may  do,  he  should  do  so  within  his  own  particular 
strength.  He will benefit tremendously as a result of this. 
 
15.6 
“However, just as a wounded warrior experiences no peace until his 
wounds are bandaged, similarly, if a person fails to recognise his own 
particular strength, he will not experience any happiness at all during 
bhajan and smaran, and the pain due to the ‘wounds’ caused by the 
vishays will not be relieved.  Therefore, after recognising which of the 
nine  types  of bhakti cause  his  mind  to  be  fixed  on Bhagvãn and 
prevents  him  from  indulging  in  any  thoughts  other  than  those  of 
Bhagvãn,  that bhakta should  realise, ‘This is my particular strength’.  
Then, he should keep that type of bhakti predominant.  This method 
is a universal principle.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III || 15 || 249 || 

GADHADÃ III 
- 719 - 
Gadhadã III – 16 
Bhakti Like A Pati Vratã 
 
16.1 
In  the Samvat year  1884,  on Ashãdh vad Amãs [23
rd
 July  1827], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   the   veranda 
outside  the  east-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.  
He was dressed entirely in white clothes.  He was wearing garlands of 
mogrã flowers around His neck, and extremely beautiful tassels were 
hanging from His pãgh.  A sabhã of munis, as well as haribhaktas from 
various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
16.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “I ask a question to the entire muni-
mandal and  to  all  the grahastha  bhaktas;  whoever  can  reply  may  do 
so.  The question is as follows:  It does not take very long for a bhakta 
of Bhagvãn to  avoid  the  company  of  a  person  who  is  full  of avgun.  
But,  how  is  it  possible  to  avoid  the  company  of  a  person  with 
extremely noble gun?  After all, a person naturally develops affection 
for  a  person  with gun,  regardless  of  whether  he  is  a  relative  or  not.  
Moreover, affection that is formed, due to the influence of those gun, 
cannot be eradicated, however much a person tries.  Therefore, how 
does  a bhakta of Bhagvãn prevent  the  development  of  affection  for 
anyone  other  than Bhagvãn,  regardless  of  the gun of  that  person?  
That is the question.” 
 
16.3 
The senior sãdhus replied according to their understanding, but were 
unable to answer Shreeji Mahãrãj’s question. 
 
16.4 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Allow me to answer.  The answer is as 
follows:    A pati vratã is  not  even  slightly  impressed  in  her  mind  on 
seeing  other  rich, handsome,  or  young  men,  even  if  her  husband  is 
poor,  ugly,  ill,  or old.    If  she  does  happen  to  affectionately  look  at  or 
laugh  with  other  men,  then  she  breaks  her pati  vratã vow.    If  some 
guests  were  to  come  to  the  house  of  that pati  vratã,  she  would  offer 
them  food  and  water.    If  she  offers  food  and  water  to  some  male 

GADHADÃ III 
- 720 - 
relative of her husband, she does so knowing him to be related to her 
husband,  but  the  affection  she  has  for  all  other  men  does  not  even 
come close to the love she has for her husband; nor does she see gun 
in  other  men  as  she  sees  in  her  own  husband.    Moreover,  she  acts 
according to the wishes of her own husband.  Such is the firm fidelity 
that a pati vratã wife has towards her husband. 
 
16.5 
“In the same way, a bhakta should  have  firm  loyalty  to Bhagvãn.  
Specifically,  like  a  woman  who  is  a pati  vratã,  he  would  never 
develop  the  same  love  towards  even  other mukta sãdhus – however 
great they may be – as he has developed towards whichever murti of 
Bhagvãn he  has  had  the darshan of.    He  does  not develop  love  for 
other avatãrs of  his ishta-dev.    He  keeps  love  only  for  the murti that 
he has attained, and he acts according to His wishes only.  If he does 
happen  to  respect  others,  it is  only  because  of  their  association  with 
his Bhagvãn.  A person who has such faithful bhakti towards his own 
ishta-dev,  never  develops  affection  on  seeing  others,  even  though  he 
may have many gun.  
 
16.6
 “For  example, Hanumãnji is   a bhakta of Shree Rãmchandraji.  
Following the avatãr of Rãm, there have been many other avatãrs of 
Bhagvãn, but Hanumãnji’s bhakti has been like that of a woman who 
observes  the  vow  of  fidelity,  as  he  has  remained  faithful  to  only 
Rãmchandraji.    This  is  why Hanumãnji’s bhakti is  considered  to  be 
like  that  of  a pati  vratã.    The bhakti of  a bhakta of Bhagvãn who  has 
such fidelity can be said to be like that of a pati vratã.  Conversely, if a 
person does not have fidelity, his bhakti can be said to be like that of 
a  prostitute.    Therefore,  a  person  should  not  knowingly  engage  in 
bhakti that  would  cause  him  to  be  disgraced.    Instead,  a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn should thoughtfully engage in faithful bhakti – like that of a 
pati vratã.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III || 16 || 250 || 
 

GADHADÃ III 
- 721 - 
Gadhadã III – 17 
The Story Of Bharatji 
 
17.1 
In  the Samvat year  1884,  on Shrãvan sud 6  [30
th
 July  1827],  Shreeji 
Mahãrãj  was sitting  on  the  veranda  outside  the  east-facing  rooms  of 
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was dressed entirely in white 
clothes  and  was  wearing  garlands  of  flowers  around  His  neck.    A 
sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had 
gathered before Him. 
 
17.2 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “There  is  no  story  in  the  Shreemad 
Bhãgvat  as  incredible  as  the  story  of  Bharatji.    This  is  because 
Bharatji  was  the  son  of Rushabh-Dev  Bhagvãn,  and  for  the  specific 
purpose   of   realising Bhagvãn,   he   gave   up   his   kingdom,   which 
consisted  of  the  whole  world,  and  retired  to  the  forest.    Then,  while 
engaged  in  the  worship  of Bhagvãn,  he  developed  affection  for  a 
young deer.  As a result, his mind’s vrutti took the form of that deer.  
As  a  result,  despite  his  greatness,  Bharatji  was  reborn  as  a  deer  due 
to the sin of that attachment. 
 
17.3 
“As a matter of fact, there are countless types of sins; but for a bhakta 
of Bhagvãn,  of  all  those  sins,  having  affection  for  anything  except 
Bhagvãn is an extremely great sin.  Therefore, if a wise person thinks 
over this story of Bharatji, he becomes extremely fearful in his heart 
with  the  thought, ‘What if I develop affection for anything other than 
Bhagvãn?’  In this way, he becomes extremely afraid. 
 
17.4 
“Then, when Bharatji gave up the body of the deer, he was born in a 
brãhman family.      Then,   out   of   fear   of   developing   affection   for 
anything  other  than Bhagvãn,  he  paid  no  attention  at  all  to  worldly 
affairs and  deliberately  behaved  as  a  madman.    He  lived  in  a  way 
where he could maintain his vrutti constantly on Bhagvãn.” 
 
17.5 
After delivering this talk, Shreeji Mahãrãj left to attend the ãrti. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III || 17 || 251 || 

GADHADÃ III 
- 722 - 
Gadhadã III – 18 
Worldly Desires Become Old 
 
18.1 
In  the Samvat year  1884,  on Shrãvan vad 10  [17
th
 August  1827], 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  the  veranda  outside  the  east-facing 
rooms  of  Dãdã  Khãchar’s darbãr in   Gadhadã.      He   was   dressed 
entirely  in  white  clothes.    Garlands  of  flowers  were  hanging  around 
His neck, and tassels of flowers were hanging from His pãgh.  A sabhã 
of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before Him. 
 
18.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj’s nephew, Raghuvirji, asked a question:  “Why 
does the jeev’s condition during the svapna state not remain the same 
as it is during the jãgrat state?” 
 
18.3 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The jeev behaves in the svapna state exactly 
as  it does  in  the jãgrat state.    After  all,  the  same  types  of  worldly 
desire, which appear while awake, spring forth in dreams as well.” 
 
18.4 
Then, Nirlobhãnand Swãmi asked, “Mahãrãj, many times, objects that 
have  never  been  seen  or  heard  in  the jãgrat state,  spring  forth  in 
dreams.  What may be the reason for this?” 
 
18.5 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  explained,  “If  objects  that  have  never  been 
previously  seen  or  heard  appear  in  the svapna state,  it  is  due  to 
embedded desires created by karmas performed in past lives.” 
 
18.6 
Then,  Akhandãnand  Swãmi  asked,  “Mahãrãj,  for  a  person  who 
becomes  a bhakta of Bhagvãn,  how  long  does  the  force  of karmas 
performed in past lives remain?” 
 
18.7 
Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “When that person comes into contact 
with  a sat-purush,  the  embedded desires  created  by  his  past karmas 
gradually   wear   away   as   he   consistently   associates   with   him.  
Eventually,  he  reaches  a  stage  where  the  desires  that  give  rise  to 

GADHADÃ III 
- 723 - 
births and deaths no longer remain.  For example, grains of rice that 
are  three  to  four  years old  can  be  eaten;  but  if  they  are  sown,  they 
would  not  grow.    In  the  same  way,  when  the  embedded  desires 
generated  by  the  previously  performed karmas degenerate,  they  do 
not lead to further births and deaths. 
 
18.8 
“However, a person may ask, ‘How does a person  recognise  whether 
those embedded desires have degenerated or not?’  Well, consider  the 
analogy  of  a  contest  between  two  men  armed  with  shields  and 
swords.    As  long  as  both  can  withstand  each  other,  the  strength  of 
both appears to be equal.  But, the moment a person draws back, he 
is  said  to  have  been  defeated.    Similarly,  for  a bhakta of Bhagvãn,  as 
long  as  thoughts  related  to Bhagvãn and  the  thoughts  related  to  the 
vishays appear to be equal, he should realise his worldly desires to be 
more   powerful.  However,   when   thoughts   related   to Bhagvãn 
displace   those   related   to   the vishays,  he  should   realise   that   his 
worldly desires have reduced.” 
 
18.9 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  asked  the paramhans a question:  “How can a 
bhakta,  who  no  longer identifies himself  with  the body  and  who  has 
developed   hatred   for   the panch-vishays,   be   recognised   by   other 
bhaktas?” 
 
18.10 
Muktãnand Swãmi replied, “Mahãrãj, we are incapable of answering 
your question.  Please be compassionate and answer it yourself.” 
 
18.11 
So, Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “Whether he is a grahastha or a tyãgi, a 
bhakta of Bhagvãn who no longer believes himself to be the body and 
whose attachment for the panch-vishays has been eradicated, may be 
required  to  behave  as  if  he  is  the  body  depending  on Bhagvãn’s 
instructions to him; he may also have to indulge in the panch-vishays 
if necessary.  For example, a frail bull can be made to stand with the 
support of a stick and by people holding it by its horn and tail.  But, it 
will   remain   standing   only   as   long   as   someone  holds   it   up;   the 
moment  it  is  released,  it  will  fall  to  the  ground.    Similarly,  a  person 

GADHADÃ III 
- 724 - 
who is free of worldly desires engages in activities only to the extent 
of the instructions given by Bhagvãn. 
 
18.12
 In  another  example,  take  a  person  with  a  bow  and  arrow  in  hand.  
The bow bends as the person pulls back the string; when he releases 
the  arrow,  the  bow  becomes  slack  again.    In  the same  way,  a  person 
free of worldly desires engages himself in activities only to the extent 
of Bhagvãn’s wish,  but  never  does  he  do  anything  which  disobeys 
that.  On the other hand, when a person with worldly desires engages 
in activities, he is unable to detach himself from those activities of his 
own accord; he is unable to do so even when Bhagvãn instructs him.  
These are the characteristics of a person free of worldly desires and a 
person with worldly desires.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã III || 18 || 252 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 19 
Two Undesirable Traits Of A Tyãgi 
 
19.1 
In  the Samvat year  1884,  on Shrãvan vad 13  [20
th
 August  1827], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  mattress  with 
cylindrical  pillow  that  had  been  placed  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on 
the veranda outside the west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr 
in Gadhadã.  He was dressed entirely in white clothes.  Also, garlands 
of mogrã and karnikãr were  hanging  around  His  neck.    A sabhã of 
munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before Him. 
 
19.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “A bhakta who  has  abandoned  worldly 
life  may  possess  two  negative  traits  which  are  not  appropriate  for 
him in this satsang; the first is lust and the second is affection for his 
relatives.    In  my  eyes,  a  person  who  possesses  these  two  negative 
traits is like an animal.  Of these two, I have an extreme repulsion for 
a person who has excessive affection for his relatives. 

GADHADÃ III 
- 725 - 
19.3 
“For this reason, a person who has abandoned worldly life should not 
keep  even  the  slightest  amount of  affection  for  his  relatives.    This  is 
because having affection for bodily relatives is a greater sin than the 
five  great  sins.    Therefore,  a tyãgi  bhakta of Bhagvãn should  realise 
his own chaitanya to be distinct from both the body and the relatives 
of the body.  He should believe, ‘I am the ãtmã; I have no relations at 
all  with  anyone’.      In   fact,   the   relatives   of   this   body   should   be 
considered  together  with  the  relatives  of  the  8.4  million  types  of 
previous life forms.  If a person does try to understand the greatness 
of  his  relatives,  knowing  them  to  be satsangis,  then  since  there  is 
already  some  affection  due  to  the  fact  that  they  are  related,  he 
develops  more  affection  for  them  than  he  has  for Bhagvãn and  the 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn.  Therefore, if a person does keep affection for his 
relatives  knowing  them  to  be bhaktas of Bhagvãn,  towards  whom 
affection is natural, then his life becomes useless. 
 
19.4 
“Moreover, it is also natural for a person to develop affection for 
those   who   perform   his sevã,   even   though   they   may   not   be   his 
relatives.  So, a person who is wise should not keep affection towards 
a  person  who  is  serving  him,  even  if  that  person  happens  to  be  a 
bhakta of Bhagvãn.  For example, if a snake has released venom into 
sweetened milk,  the mixture  also  becomes  poisonous.   Similarly, out 
of self-interest, a person should not keep affection towards someone 
who  performs  his sevã,  even  if  the  person  serving  happens  to  be  a 
bhakta.    This  is  because  his jeev becomes  attached  due  to  that sevã.  
Then,  just  as  he  thinks  about Bhagvãn, he  also  begins  to  think  about 
the person who serves his needs.  For that person, this in itself is an 
obstacle  in  his  worship  of Bhagvãn – just  as  the  young  deer  itself 
becomes avidyã (mãyã) for Bharatji.  In this way, a bhakta of Bhagvãn 
should  totally  avoid  all  those  who  obstruct  his  worship  of Bhagvãn, 
knowing them to be avidyã.” 
 
19.5 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then concluded by adding, “The paramhans and  all 
the sãnkhya-yogi bhaktas should  daily  say  and  listen  to  this  talk 
which  I  have  just  delivered.    Specifically,  the  senior  member  of  a 

GADHADÃ III 
- 726 - 
mandal should daily narrate this talk, and others should listen.  If the 
senior  person  fails  to  do  so,  he  should  do upvãs on  that  day.    Those 
who  do  not  come  to  listen  to  that  talk  of Bhagvãn with shraddhã 
should  also  do upvãs.    Please  remember  these  words  firmly  in  your 
lives.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 19 || 253 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 20 
Svabhãv And Vãsnã 
 
20.1 
In  the Samvat year  1884,  on  the  night  of Shrãvan vad Amãs [22
nd
 
August  1827],  Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  in  His 
residence in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed 
entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of sãdhus,  as  well  as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
20.2 
Then, Dinã-Nãth Bhatt asked a question:  “Mahãrãj, Kãl is  the  power 
of Bhagvãn,  and karma refers  to  the  actions  performed  by  the jeev.  
But, what exactly is svabhãv?” 
 
20.3 
Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “The karmas that  the jeev has  performed 
during  past  lives  have  fully  developed  and  have  become  absorbed 
within the jeev.  Just as fire ‘enters’ iron, similarly, those karmas have 
developed and have become one with the jeev.  It is those karmas that 
are known as svabhãv, or vãsnã, or prakruti.” 
 
20.4 
Muktãnand Swãmi then asked, “Mahãrãj, the karmas which  have 
become  absorbed  within  the jeev,  are  called svabhãv or vãsnã.    But, 
how does a person eradicate vãsnã?” 
 
20.5 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “It appears that the only means to do so is by 
performing  the bhakti of Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn,  coupled  with  the 

GADHADÃ III 
- 727 - 
ãtmã-nishthã.    If  a  person  offers bhakti to Shree  Krishna  Bhagvãn 
without ãtmã-nishthã,  then  just  as  he  has  love  for Bhagvãn,  he  will 
also   develop   love   for   other   material   objects.      Therefore, bhakti 
accompanied  by ãtmã-nishthã is  the  only  means  to  eradicate vãsnã.  
However,  even  a  person  who  has ãtmã-nishthã may  be  disturbed  by 
unpleasant  circumstances,  just  like  an  ignorant  person.    However, 
such disturbances do not last long.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 20 || 254 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 21 
Dharma And Ekãntik Dharma  
 
21.1 
In  the Samvat year  1884,  on Bhãdarvã sud 9  [31
st
 August  1827], 
Swãmi  Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was sitting  on  a  mattress  with  a 
cylindrical  pillow  that  had  been  placed  on  a  decorated  bedstead 
outside the west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  
He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes,  and  garlands  of chameli 
flowers  were  hanging  around His  neck.    A sabhã of  the  entire muni-
mandal,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before Him. 
 
21.2 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  requested  Gopãlãnand  Swãmi  and  Shuk  Muni 
to begin a question-answer discussion. 
 
21.3 
Then, Shuk Muni asked Gopãlãnand Swãmi, “It is through offering 
bhakti to Bhagvãn that  the jeev crosses Bhagvãn’s Mãyã and  attains 
Akshardhãm.    Through dharma,  it  attains  Dev-Lok;  but  once  the 
rewards  it  has  accumulated  are  exhausted,  the jeev falls  from  Dev-
Lok.  Now, whenever there is a decline in dharma, Bhagvãn assumes 
an avatãr for  the  purpose  of  restoring bhakti.    However,  it  appears 
that  whatever  can  be  attained  through bhakti cannot  be  attained 
through dharma.  Therefore, how can the level of dharma be elevated 
to the status of bhakti?  That is the question.” 

GADHADÃ III 
- 728 - 
21.4 
Gopãlãnand  Swãmi  began  to  answer  that  question.    In  whatever  he 
said, dharma became a  component  of bhakti,  but in  no  way  could he 
elevate the level of dharma to the status of bhakti. 
 
21.5 
On    hearing    this,    Shreeji    Mahãrãj    laughed    a    great    deal,    and 
commented, “To answer that question is difficult indeed.  Therefore, 
allow me to answer it.”  He then explained, “Dharma is of two types:  
One  is nivrutti dharma and  the  other  is pravrutti dharma.  In  turn, 
these two types of dharma can either be related to Bhagvãn or not to 
Bhagvãn.  Of these two, the type of dharma that is related to Bhagvãn 
is  the  one  that  was  adopted  by Nãrad,  the Sanakãdik,  Shukji,  Dhruv, 
Prahlãd,  and  Ambrish.    It  is  this dharma that  is  known  as bhãgvat 
dharma or ekãntik dharma.    In  fact,  this  type  of dharma is  not 
different  from bhakti;  they  are  both  one.    The  type  of dharma that 
avatãrs of Bhagvãn come  to  establish  is  this  very  same dharma.    On 
the  other  hand,  the dharma of a person’s varna and ãshram alone  is 
extremely   inferior   compared   to bhãgvat dharma,   because   it   is 
through bhãgvat  dharma that  the jeev crosses Bhagvãn’s Mãyã and 
attains  the dhãm of Purushottam.    Therefore,  the  status  of bhãgvat 
dharma and bhakti is  the  same,  and  the  rewards  of  both  are  exactly 
the  same  as  well;  so,  the  greatness  of bhakti and dharma are  the 
same.  In comparison, the dharma of a person’s varna and ãshram on 
its own is extremely weak, and its rewards are temporary.” 
 
21.6 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then continued, “In my opinion, even if I try to 
develop  affection  for  anyone  other  than Bhagvãn and  His ekãntik 
bhaktas, I cannot do so.  I also feel that my strength is similar to that 
of  Jadbharat,  Shukdevji, Dattãtrey,  and Rushabh-Dev Bhagvãn.    As  a 
result,  I  also  prefer  to  stay  only  in  forests,  mountains,  and  jungles;  I 
do  not  like  to  stay  in  large  towns  or  cities.    This  is  my  inherent 
nature.  Despite this, I stay in the midst of thousands of people for the 
sake of Bhagvãn and His bhaktas.  However, I remain just as detached 
here  as  I  would  if  I  were  living  in  the  forests.    I  do  not  stay  amidst 
thousands  of  people  out  of  any  self-interest;  it  is  for  the  sake  of 
Bhagvãn and His bhaktas that I stay in the midst of people.  No matter 

GADHADÃ III 
- 729 - 
how much pravrutti I may have to engage myself in for the sake of the 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn, I still consider it to be nivrutti. 
 
21.7 
“Moreover, I do not see the flaws of a bhakta of Bhagvãn, however 
much  at  fault  he  may  be.    I  believe  that  even  if  there  are  some 
intrinsic,   minor   flaws   in   a bhakta of Bhagvãn, a   person   should 
overlook them.  However, if those flaws are in himself, then he should 
make an effort to eradicate them.  Also, if that type of flaw appears in 
a bhakta of Bhagvãn, he  should  not  take  note of  that  flaw.    A  person 
should  perceive  flaws  in  a bhakta only  if  he  were  to  lapse  in  his 
observance of some major vartmãn, but not on account of some other 
minor flaw.   
 
21.8 
“A  person should  also  not  be  pleased  by  defeating  a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn in   arguments.      Instead,   he   should   derive   pleasure   in 
deliberately losing to him.  A person who does engage in an argument 
and defeats a bhakta of Bhagvãn is a sinner worse than someone who 
has committed the five great sins. 
 
21.9 
“In addition, I do not like even the sight of a person who speaks 
unkindly  of  a bhakta of Bhagvãn before  me.    In  fact,  I  do  not  enjoy 
food or water offered by a person who perceives flaws in a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn.  If he does do so, then even if he happens to be my relative, I 
still develop an intense dislike for him.  This is because in reality, we 
are the ãtmã; so, why should we keep affection for our body and the 
relatives of the body?  We have developed affection for Bhagvãn and 
His bhaktas believing  ourselves  to  be  an ãtmã,  not  out  of  the  belief 
that we are the body. 
 
21.10 
“The inner enemies, such as kãm, krodh, lobh, moh,  will  certainly 
distress a person who is unable to behave as the ãtmã.  Therefore, if a 
person  offers bhakti without  attaining ãtmã-nishthã,  his  true  nature 
is  sure  to  be  exposed  in  this satsang.    This  is  because  this satsang is 
alokik,  and  all  these satsangis are  exactly  like Bhagvãn’s pãrshads 
residing  in Shvet-Dvip, Vaikunth,  and Golok.    I  take  oath  on Bhagvãn 

GADHADÃ III 
- 730 - 
and  His bhaktas that  I  realise  these satsangis to  be  the  same  as  the 
pãrshads of Bhagvãn residing in the divya Akshardhãm. 
 
21.11 
“However, a person whose gnãn, vairãgya, dharma,  and bhakti are 
not  extremely  firm  will  most  certainly  fall  back  in satsang.    For 
example,   a   thread   dipped   in   wax   remains   stiff   in   winter   and 
monsoon,  but  when  summer  comes,  it  becomes  loose.    In  the  same 
way,  monsoon  and  winter  represent  the  period  when  the bhaktas 
here  are  happy  in  every  way  and  are  also honoured  in satsang.  
During  that  period, gnãn, vairãgya, dharma,  and bhakti appear  to  be 
very intense.  However, with the arrival of summer – the period when 
a bhakta is  insulted  in satsang or   when   he   becomes   physically 
distressed – his gnãn, vairãgya, dharma, and bhakti become loose like 
the thread dipped in wax.  Even then, I do not abandon such a person.  
However,  he  becomes  obliged  to  leave satsang of  his  own  accord.  
Then, even if he is supposedly a satsangi, he does not experience the 
bliss of satsang within. 
 
21.12 
“For  this  reason,  a  person  should  practise satsang with  intense 
firmness after attaining ãtmã-nishthã; he should not practise satsang 
in such a way that affection for his body and his relatives persists.  To 
continue  the  analogy,  a  thread of  gold  remains  the  same  in  all  six 
seasons;  it  does  not  become  loose  even  during  the  heat  of  summer.  
Similarly, when a person’s satsang is  firm,  regardless  of  the  amount 
of  misery  that  he  may  encounter,  and  however  many  times  he  is 
insulted  in satsang,  his  mind  never  turns  away  from satsang.    Only 
such  loyal satsangi Vaishnavs are  my  relatives;  and  I  wish  to  stay  in 
Krishna Bhagvãn’s dhãm.    This  is  my  decision,  and  all  of  you  should 
also make the same decision. 
 
21.13 
“I say this because as you have all become my ãshrit, I should tell you 
that which is beneficial to you.  After all, a true friend is a person who 
tells  us  that  which  benefits  us,  even  if  it  may  appear  to  be  hurtful.  
Please realise this as the characteristic of a true friend.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 21 || 255 || 

GADHADÃ III 
- 731 - 
Gadhadã III – 22 
Loving Bhakti 
 
22.1 
In  the Samvat year  1884,  on Bhãdarvã vad 4  [9
th
 September  1827], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   the   veranda 
outside the west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  
He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    Tassels  of  white  flowers 
were  hanging  from  his pãgh,  and  garlands  of  white  flowers  were 
hanging   around   His   neck.      A sabhã of paramhans,   as   well   as 
haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered  before  Him.    Some 
paramhans were  singing  a vishnupad to  the  accompaniment  of  a 
dukad and sarodã.    Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  in  the sabhã with 
antar-drashti. 
 
22.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “The strength of profound, loving bhakti 
in  a bhakta of Bhagvãn, as  described  in  this kirtan,  is  the strength of 
Jhinã-Bhãi,  and  it  was  the  strength  of  Parvat-Bhãi  and  Mulji  Brahm-
Chãri as well.  While keeping antar-drashti, I was thinking that there 
must also be others in this satsang with the same strength.  A person 
who   develops   this   strength   of   profound,   loving bhakti loses   all 
attachment to the panch-vishays and is able to maintain ãtmã-nishthã 
without even having to try.” 
 
22.3 
Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked, “Narsinh Mehtã worshipped Shree 
Krishna Bhagvãn with a sense of friendship, whereas many bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn,  such  as Nãrad,  worshipped Bhagvãn with sevã.    Of  these 
two  types  of bhaktas,  whose bhakti should  be  regarded  as  being 
better?” 
 
22.4 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  replied,  “The  type  of bhakti offered  by  Narsinh 
Mehtã,  the gopis, Nãrad,  and  the Sanakãdik is  not  of  two  types;  in 
reality, it is of one type.  After all, the body – be it male or female – is 
worldly  and  perishable.  However,  the jeevãtmã,  the  worshipper,  is 
neither male nor female, but is chetan.  When the jeevãtmã leaves its 
body  and  travels  to  the dhãm of Bhagvãn, it  assumes  a svarup 
according    to    the    wish    of Bhagvãn;    or,    depending    upon    the 

GADHADÃ III 
- 732 - 
opportunity   for sevã that   arises   there,   that bhakta assumes   an 
appropriate svarup and performs the sevã of Bhagvãn accordingly. 
 
22.5 
“However, if a bhakta of Bhagvãn develops  the  same  attachment  to 
wealth, women and other objects as he has towards Bhagvãn, then he 
cannot be called a loyal bhakta of Bhagvãn.  Having become a bhakta 
of Bhagvãn, if   a   person   commits   sins   and   accumulates   harmful 
desires in satsang itself while offering bhakti, then those sins become 
embedded in him – as if etched in iron.  Moreover, a greater sin than 
associating  with  the  wife of  another  man  due  to  the  influence  of  evil 
company is to look at a bhakta of Bhagvãn lustfully while in satsang.  
Therefore,  a  person  who  wishes  to  develop  deep  attachment  to 
Bhagvãn should not allow any type of sin to remain in his mind.  This 
is  because  female satsangi bhaktas are  to be viewed as a person’s 
own  mother,  sister,  or  daughter.    Those  who  look at  women  of  their 
own family lustfully are the extremely evil sinners in this world.  So, a 
person who looks at bhaktas lustfully is an evil sinner and will never 
be  released  from  that  sin.    That  is  why  a  person  who  wishes  to 
become  a rasik bhakta should  become  a rasik bhakta after  avoiding 
this kind of sin. 
 
22.6 
“Having  said  this,  the  greatest  of  all  sins  is  perceiving  faults  in 
Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas,  because  due  to  that  fault-finding  attitude, 
hatred is created towards them.  Even if a person has killed millions 
of  cows,  consumed  alcohol  and  meat,  and  committed  adultery  with 
the wife of his guru countless times, he can still be released from such 
sins at some time or other.  However, a person who insults Bhagvãn 
and  His bhaktas will  never  be  released  from  his  sin.    Then,  if  the 
person insulting Bhagvãn and His bhaktas is a male, he will become a 
male  demon;  or  if  female,  she  will  become  a  female  demon.    Then, 
even after countless lives, that person will never stop being a demon 
and will never become a bhakta of Bhagvãn. 
 
22.7 
“Furthermore,  a  person  who  has  already  insulted  a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn and  whose  insulting  attitude  has  become  established  will 

GADHADÃ III 
- 733 - 
under  no  circumstances  be  able  to eradicate  that  attitude.    On  the 
other   hand,   another   person   who   is   in   the   process   of   insulting, 
realises, ‘I have committed a great sin by insulting Bhagvãn and His 
bhaktas;  therefore  I  am  extremely  evil,  and  Bhagvãn  and  His  bhaktas 
are extremely great’.  When a person sees the qualities of others and 
sees  faults  within  himself  in  this  way,  then  any  sins  he  may  have 
committed will be eradicated, however great they may be. 
 
22.8 
“No other sin displeases and hurts Bhagvãn more  than  the  sin  of 
insulting  His bhaktas.    When  Jay  and  Vijay  insulted  the Sanakãdik in 
Vaikunth, Bhagvãn immediately  rushed  to  the Sanakãdik and  told 
them, ‘Whoever insults sãdhus like you is my enemy.  Therefore, you 
have  done  well  in  giving  a  curse  to  Jay  and  Vijay.    In  fact,  if  my  own 
hand  were  to  harm  brãhmans  like  you,  then  even  I  would  cut  off  my 
hand; so what can I say to others?’  This is what Vishnu Bhagvãn said 
to  the Sanakãdik.    As  a  result,  Jay  and  Vijay  became  demons  due  to 
the  sin  of insulting  the  devout bhaktas of Bhagvãn. Others  who have 
also  insulted bhaktas of Bhagvãn have  all  fallen  from their  high 
position – a  fact  that  is  well  noted  in  the shãstras.    Therefore,  a 
person who desires the best for himself should not insult the bhaktas 
of Bhagvãn.    If  a  person  does  happen to  knowingly  or  unknowingly 
insult someone, then he should bow at that person’s feet, pray to him, 
and act in a way that pleases him.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 22 || 256 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 23 
Mãnsi Pujã 
 
23.1 
In the Samvat year 1885, on the night of Ãso sud Punam [22
nd
 October 
1828], Swãmi Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting on a decorated 
bedstead  that  had  been  placed  in  the  yard  of  His  residence  in  Dãdã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various 
places, had gathered before Him. 

GADHADÃ III 
- 734 - 
23.2 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj,  out  of  compassion,  addressed  all  the bhaktas 
and said, “A person who is a bhakta of Bhagvãn daily  performs  the 
mãnsi pujã of Bhagvãn.   A person should perform that mãnsi pujã in 
different ways, depending on the three seasons: summer, winter, and 
monsoon.  
 
23.3 
“During the four months of summer, a person should perform pujã by 
first bathing Bhagvãn with cool, fragrant, pure water.  He should then 
offer Him a beautiful, washed, thin, white khes to wear.  After seating 
Bhagvãn on a beautiful seat, His whole body should be smeared with 
fragrant  sandalwood  from  the  Malay  mountains,  which  has  been 
collected   in   a   bowl   after   forming   it   into   a paste.      Firstly,   the 
sandalwood  paste  should  be  smeared  on  His  forehead  and  closely 
observed;  then  the  paste  should  be  smeared  on  His  chest,  stomach, 
thighs,  calves,  and  other  parts  of  His  body.    Those  parts  should  also 
be observed.  Then, beautiful kum-kum should be applied on His holy 
feet  as  well  as  on  the  soles  of  His  feet,  and  they  too  should  then  be 
observed.  Then, garlands of fragrant flowers, such as mogrã, chameli, 
champã,  and  roses,  as  well  as  various  jewellery,  and bãjubandh and 
berkhã made of flowers should be offered.  A fine cloth that is not too 
heavy  and  is  as  white  as  a mogrã flower  should  be  tied  around  His 
head;  and  a  beautiful,  white  cloth  which  is  fine  and  light,  should  be 
wrapped around His body.  Then, he should embrace Bhagvãn – once, 
or  twice,  or  according  to  the  degree  of  his  love.    Then,  he  should 
touch Bhagvãn’s holy  feet  to  his  own  chest  and  head.    During  the 
embrace, the sandalwood paste on Bhagvãn’s body, as well as parts of 
the garlands of flowers, may stick to his own body; and kum-kum may 
also stick as a result of touching Bhagvãn’s holy feet to his own chest 
and   head.      All   this   should   be   visualised,   and   he   should   feel, 
‘Sandalwood paste, kum-kum,  and  garlands  blessed  by  Bhagvãn  have 
touched my body!’ 
 
23.4 
“During the four months of  winter,  a  person should  perform pujã by 
first  bathing Bhagvãn with  warm  water,  and  then  offering  Him  a 
white khes to  wear.    He  should  then  seat Bhagvãn on  a  decorated 

GADHADÃ III 
- 735 - 
bedstead  with  a  velvet  mattress  that  has  been  covered  with  a  white 
sheet.  He should offer a survãl, offer a dagli, tie a rich orange reto of 
golden threads around His head, tie a rich reto around His waist, and 
place  a  rich reto over  His  shoulders.    Then,  he  should  place  various 
types  of  jewellery  made  of  diamonds,  pearls,  gold,  and rubies  on 
various  parts  of  His  body,  and  also  a  pearl  necklace.    After  offering 
these  clothes  and  jewellery,  the  various  parts  of Bhagvãn’s body 
should  be  closely  observed.    A kum-kum chãndlo should  also  be 
applied to Bhagvãn’s forehead. 
 
23.5 
“During the four months of monsoon, a person should perform pujã 
imagining  that Bhagvãn has  returned  from  some  village,  and  His 
white clothes have become completely drenched; or that He had gone 
to  bathe  with  the paramhans in  a  river  and  has  returned  from there 
completely  drenched.    After  removing  His  wet  clothes,  He  should  be 
offered  deep  orange  garments  to  wear,  and  His  forehead  should  be 
smeared with yellow sandalwood paste mixed with saffron. 
 
23.6 
“During summer, a person should visualise Bhagvãn to  be sitting 
either  in  an  open  place  or  in  a  flower  garden.    During  winter  and 
monsoon,  he  should  visualise Bhagvãn to  be  seated  in  a medi,  or 
inside  a  house.    In  particular,  when  offering Bhagvãn something  to 
eat,  only  those  foods – that  are  chewed,  drunk,  licked,  or  sucked – 
which  he  likes  to  eat  should  be  visualised  for  offering  to Bhagvãn.  
Even  if Bhagvãn does  not  like  these  foods,  when  offering  items  to 
Him,  a  person  should  still  visualise  only  those  items  that  he  enjoys 
himself.    Also,  incense,  oil  lamps,  flowers,  and ãrti should  be  offered 
to Bhagvãn as appropriate. 
 
23.7 
“In this way, a bhakta who offers pujã in different ways according to 
the  three  different  seasons  increases  his  love  for Bhagvãn, and  his 
jeev benefits  tremendously.    Therefore,  whoever  has  heard  this  talk 
should  remember  it  and daily  perform  the mãnsi pujã of Bhagvãn in 
the way described.  As a matter of fact, I have never talked about this 
before.” 

GADHADÃ III 
- 736 - 
23.8 
Shreeji   Mahãrãj   then   spoke   on   another   topic.    He  said,  “When 
Bhagvãn and His bhaktas are pleased on a bhakta, he should feel, ‘It is 
my great fortune that Bhagvãn and His bhaktas are pleased with me’.  
Also, when they lecture him, for the purpose of teaching a lesson, he 
should feel, ‘It is my great fortune that they lecture me; after all, it will 
help in removing my flaws’.    In  this  way,  a  person  should  be  pleased 
even  if  lectured;  he  should  not  feel  any  grief  in  his  mind,  nor  get 
upset, nor even regard himself as being very sinful.  He should always 
remain pleased.  This attitude should always be remembered.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 23 || 257 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 24 
Sixteen Spiritual Activities 
Vairãgya Due To Gnãn 
 
24.1 
In the Samvat year 1885, on Ãso vad 12 [4
th
 November 1828], Shreeji 
Mahãrãj   was   sitting   in   the mandir of Shree   Gopinãthji in   Dãdã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.    A sabhã of sãdhus,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various 
places, had gathered before Him. 
 
24.2 
Then, Muktãnand Swãmi asked Shreeji Mahãrãj, “The bhaktas remain 
in Bhagvãn’s sevã in Akshardhãm.    What  are  the  spiritual  activities 
needed to earn such sevã?” 
 
24.3 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “An ekãntik bhakta easily  earns Bhagvãn’s 
sevã in Akshardhãm through  sixteen  spiritual  activities: shraddhã; 
svadharma; vairãgya;  total  control  over  the indriyas; ahinsã; brahm-
chãrya;  keeping  the  company  of sãdhus; ãtmã-nishthã;  unwavering 
bhakti to Bhagvãn coupled  with  the  knowledge  of  His  greatness; 
happiness;  honesty;  compassion;  penance;  treating  senior bhaktas 
with greater qualities as gurus and also maintaining deep respect for 
them; maintaining a feeling of friendship towards those bhaktas who 

GADHADÃ III 
- 737 - 
are  his equal;  and  treating  those bhaktas who  are  junior  to  him  as  a 
shishya and acting for their benefit.” 
 
24.4 
Shuk Muni then asked, “All of our sãdhus observe vartmãns.    But, 
what  characteristic  in  a sãdhu would  enable  us  to  be  sure  that  the 
sãdhu would   never deviate   from   his dharma even   in   times   of 
difficulty?” 
 
24.5 
Shreeji Mahãrãj answered, “A sãdhu whose  attention  is  constantly 
focused  on  all  of  those ãgnãs given  by Bhagvãn, whether  they  are 
major  or  minor;  and  who  finds  it  extremely  difficult  to  disobey  any 
ãgnã;   and   who   acts   neither   excessively   nor   in   a   careless   way 
regarding  those ãgnãs, should  be  known  as a  person  who  would  not 
fall from his dharma despite difficult circumstances.” 
 
24.6 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then spoke out of compassion:  “It is very difficult for 
a  person  to  eradicate  his svabhãv.    Regardless  of  this,  if  he  has 
realised  that satsang fulfils  his  self-interest,  then  it  is  not  difficult  to 
do so.  For example, the members of Dãdã Khãchar’s family have an 
interest in keeping me here, so they do not retain any svabhãv that I 
do not like.  In this way, a person’s svabhãv can be eradicated due to 
self-interest.    It  can  also  be  eradicated  out  of  fear,  although  not 
totally.    This  is  because  a  person  may  fear  someone  in  his  presence, 
but  when  that  person  is  not  present,  he  may  no  longer  be  fearful – 
just as a thief abandons his corrupt nature due to fear of the king. 
 
24.7 
“Furthermore, despite the fact that I have repeatedly fired harsh 
words and upset a person who possesses some svabhãv or another, if 
he is not disheartened in any way at all, then I have such love for that 
person  that  the  love  remains  effortlessly  as  it  is,  in  the jãgrat state 
and svapna state.  Regardless of whatever happens, that love does not 
diminish. 
 
24.8 
“Moreover,  of  the  various gun possessed  by bhaktas,  I  shall  now 
narrate  one  admirable gun in  each bhakta.    Dãdã  Khãchar – gun of 
faith;  Rãj-Bãi – gun of tyãg;  Jeevu-Bã – gun of shraddhã,  Lãdu-Bã – 

GADHADÃ III 
- 738 - 
gun of  desiring  to  please  me;  Nityãnand  Swãmi – gun of  desiring  to 
please me; Brahmãnand Swãmi – gun of insisting that there should be 
no lapse at all in observing the niyams of satsang; Muktãnand Swãmi  
– gun of desiring to please me and having faith in me; Somlã Khãchar 
– gun of always behaving consistently; Chaitanyãnand Swãmi – gun of 
wishing  to  behave  in  such  a  way  that  pleases  Mahãrãj  in  any  way; 
Svayamprakãshãnand   Swãmi – gun of nishchay in Bhagvãn and 
realising His greatness; Jhinã-Bhãi Thãkor – gun of having awareness, 
for  fear  that  he  becomes attached  to  any  object  other  than Bhagvãn; 
and Motã Ãtmãnand Swãmi – gun of ensuring that none of my ãgnãs 
are disobeyed.”  In this way, Shreeji Mahãrãj narrated the gun of 
many senior paramhans and other bhaktas. 
 
24.9 
He then continued, “The three senior ladies of this place (Rãj-Bãi, 
Jeevu-Bã,   and   Lãdu-Bã),   and   Gopãlãnand   Swãmi,   Brahmãnand 
Swãmi,   Muktãnand   Swãmi,   Nityãnand   Swãmi,   Shuk   Muni,   Somlã 
Khãchar,  and  Dãdã  Khãchar – all  of  you  presently  behave  very  well.  
However,  if  the  four  factors  of desh, kãl, kriyã,  and sang were  to 
become   unpleasant,   then   there   is   no   doubt   at   all   that   your 
enthusiasm would not remain as it is now.  However, if a person who 
has a great degree of gnãn were to be caught in the vishays, he would 
break  free  from  that  attachment.    This gnãn is  the  understanding, ‘I, 
the jeev, am like this; the body is like this; the relations of the body are 
like this;  the  nature of  Prakruti,  Purush,  virãt,  sutrãtmã,  and  avyãkrut 
is  like  this;  Bhagvãn  is like this; and the dhãm of Bhagvãn is like this’, 
and  so  on.    If  a  person  has  firm  belief  of  this gnãn in  his  heart,  then 
the vairãgya that results is true vairãgya.  Apart from that, any other 
form  of vairãgya only  superficially  appears  to  be vairãgya;  in fact, 
there  is  no  strength  in  it.    For  example,  the  flame  of  an  oil  lamp  is 
extinguished  by  the  wind,  whereas  the vadvãnal fire  and  fire  of 
lightning   in   the   clouds   is   not   extinguished   by   water;   despite 
remaining  in  water  itself,  it  continues  to  burn.    In the  same  way, 
vairãgya without gnãn does  not  last  when  it  encounters  the vishays.  
On  the  other  hand, vairãgya produced  from gnãn does  not  diminish 

GADHADÃ III 
- 739 - 
despite   encountering   the vishays;   it   continues   to   burn   like   the 
vadvãnal fire. 
 
24.10 
“It is precisely for the  purpose  of  somehow  instilling  this gnãn in 
your minds that I continuously deliver talks.  If a talk eventually does 
truly inspire you, then this gnãn will become instilled in you.  On the 
other  hand,  if  a  person  does  not  understand  this  and  instead  has a 
sense of ‘I-ness’ and ‘my-ness’ by believing, ‘This is my varna, this is 
my mother, this is my father, these are my relatives’, then he should be 
known    to    be    an   extremely   ignorant    person    with    a    worldly 
perception.” 
 
24.11 
Having  said  this,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  again  spoke  out  of  compassion:  
“What is the reason behind a mumukshu attaining  noble qualities?  
Well,  a  person  develops  hatred  for  the  world  in  proportion  to  the 
attachment  he  has  for  listening  to  the  talks  and kathãs of Bhagvãn. 
Also,  vicious  natures, such  as kãm, krodh, lobh,  and moh,  are  also 
destroyed to that extent.  Conversely, if a person is lazy in listening to 
those  talks  and kathãs,  then  he  should  assume  that  he  will  not 
remember  noble shãstras.  In  fact,  out  of  the  nine  types  of bhakti 
mentioned   in   the shãstras,   the bhakti of   listening   to kathãs  is 
considered  to  be  the  best.    Therefore,  a  person  who  possesses  that 
form  of bhakti will  attain  all  the  various  forms  of bhakti up  to  the 
including profound, loving bhakti.”  Shreeji Mahãrãj delivered the talk 
in this way. 
 
24.12 
At  noon  on  that  same  day,  when  all  the paramhans were  seated  for 
their meals in a line on the veranda outside the north-facing rooms of 
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated 
bedstead that had been placed under the neem tree. 
 
24.13 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said  to  the paramhans, “A person should not 
understand   the   greatness   of   female bhaktas in   excess.      This   is 
because   under   the   excuse   of   realising   their   greatness,   he   may 
constantly  think  of  them,  leading  to  them  appearing  in  his  dreams.  
So,    if    a    person    does    understand    their    greatness,    he    should 

GADHADÃ III 
- 740 - 
understand  it  collectively,  by  thinking, ‘All of them are bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn’.      However,   he   should   not   attempt   to   understand   a 
particular bhakta as  being  greater  and  another bhakta being  lesser.  
If  he  attempts  to  understand  their  greatness  to  a  greater  or  lesser 
degree  than  this,  then  there  is  a  great  danger  in  that.    Similarly, 
female bhaktas should also understand the greatness of male bhaktas 
collectively.    If  they  do  not  realise  this,  then  it  is  also  a  great  danger 
for those females.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 24 || 258 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 25 
Raj-Bãi’s Question 
 
25.1 
In  the Samvat year  1885,  on Kãrtik sud 10  [16
th
 November  1828], 
Swãmi   Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   on   a   decorated 
bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  west-facing  rooms  of  Dãdã 
Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white 
clothes.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various 
places, had gathered before Him. 
 
25.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj spoke out of compassion:  “Bhakti, upãsanã, 
sevã, shraddhã,  firmness  in  observing dharma,  and  other  spiritual 
activities related to Bhagvãn should all be performed without having 
desires   for   any   rewards.      This   fact   is   mentioned   in   the   sacred 
shãstras,  and  it  is  true;  but,  a  person  should  certainly  have  the 
following  desire:   ‘May Bhagvãn become pleased with me through 
these activities’.    That  desire  should  be  kept.    On  the  other  hand,  if  a 
person  does  not  keep  such  a  desire  and  acts  without  any  specific 
purpose, then he should be known to possess tamo-gun.  Therefore, a 
person   should   develop   the qualities of bhakti, upãsanã, sevã, 
shraddhã, and dharma with the desire for rewards in the form of the 
happiness of Bhagvãn.  If a person has any desire other than that, he 
will attain only rewards such as the four types of mukti. 

GADHADÃ III 
- 741 - 
25.3 
“Furthermore, it is not the case that Bhagvãn’s happiness is bestowed 
only  on  those  who  offer bhakti with  various  items  and  not  upon  the 
poor.  Someone may be poor, but if he offers water, leaves, fruits, and 
flowers to Bhagvãn with shraddhã, that is enough to please Him.  This 
is  because Bhagvãn is  extremely  great.    Just  as  a  king  rewards 
someone  who  composes  even  a  verse  in  his  praise  with  a  village, 
similarly, Bhagvãn also becomes pleased instantly.” 
  
25.4 
Continuing, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Who can be called a true bhakta of 
Bhagvãn?  If some prolonged illness were to overtake a person’s 
body; or if he receives neither food to eat nor any clothes to wear; or 
regardless  of  the  extent  of  pain  or  pleasure  that  come  his  way,  if  he 
still  does  not  fall  back  even  slightly  from  the  worship  of bhakti of 
Bhagvãn, niyams, dharma,  or shraddhã,  but  progresses  with  time, 
then he is called a true bhakta.” 
 
25.5 
Then,  Rãj-Bãi had a question asked to Shreeji Mahãrãj, “Which gun 
pleases you, and which avgun displeases you?” 
 
25.6 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “The following are the avgun of  speech:    If 
someone wishes to behave in some special way, then he should notify 
me only once by saying:  ‘Mahãrãj, if you agree, then I shall behave like 
this’.    I  do  not  like  it  when  a  person  repeatedly  asks, ‘Mahãrãj, why 
are you not telling me whether I should behave like this or behave like 
that?’  I  do  not  like  a  person  who,  despite  knowing  me  as  his ishta-
dev,  repeatedly  questions  my  words.    I  do  not  like  a  person  who 
interrupts  me  while  I  am  speaking  to  someone.    Regarding  the 
performance  of  religious  actions,  such  as  performing dhyãn upon 
Bhagvãn, observance  of dharma,  offering bhakti,  I  do  not  like  a 
person   who   throws   the   burden   of  such   actions   on Bhagvãn by 
thinking, ‘Only if Bhagvãn wishes are these possible’.  Also, I do not like 
a  person  who thinks, ‘I shall do this; and I shall do that’,  and  then 
relies only on his own strength and not on the strength of Bhagvãn.  I 
extremely  dislike  a  person  who  speaks  inconsistently  and  rudely.    I 
do  not  like  a  person  who  feels  a  sense  of  shame  or  laziness when  it 

GADHADÃ III 
- 742 - 
comes  to  talking  of Bhagvãn, listening  to kathãs, or  singing kirtans, 
and  yet  feels  no  shame  or  laziness  in  performing  worldly  activities.  
Also,  I  do  not  like  a  person  who  boasts  of  his tyãg or bhakti,  or  of 
anything  else.    I  do  not  like  a  person who  sits  behind  everyone  else 
during  a sabhã instead  of  sitting  as  suits  his  own  status.    Moreover, 
when  seniors  are  seated  in  a sabhã,  I  do  not  like  a  person  who 
forcibly  pushes  them  aside  to  take  his  own  place  at  the  front  of  the 
sabhã. 
 
25.7 
“In addition, I am pleased with female bhaktas who  behave  morally 
by   covering   their   own   bodies   and   who   keep   their   gaze   cast 
downwards  when  they  walk,  instead  of  keeping  a  wandering  gaze.  
Many times, instead of doing my darshan with a fixed gaze, someone 
may abandon that darshan and look repeatedly in the direction of an 
approaching  man  or  woman,  or  a  dog  walking  by,  or  cattle  walking 
by, or in the direction of some noise.  On such a person, I feel so much 
disgust that I feel, ‘What can I do?  If I had not become a sãdhu, I would 
beat  him  in  some  way!’  But,  that  is  not  possible  since  beating 
someone  is  extremely  inappropriate  for  a sãdhu.  I  also  do  not  like  a 
person  who  conceals  the  truth – who  does  not  reveal  the  disturbing 
thoughts that arise in his mind to an appropriate person.  Also, these 
three   things   are   extremely   harmful:    mãn, krodh,   and   being   so 
suppressed  by  others  that  what  is  in  the  mind  cannot  be  revealed.  
Also, if bhaktas become disrespectful because they view each other as 
equals  and  do  not maintain  respect  for  one  another,  that  is  also 
extremely inappropriate.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 25 || 259 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 26 
A Sant Who Is Worthy Of Sevã Equally To Bhagvãn 
 
26.1 
In  the Samvat year  1885,  on Kãrtik sud 11  [17
th
 November  1828], 
Swãmi Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in the mandir of Shree 

GADHADÃ III 
- 743 - 
Gopinãthji in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed 
entirely   in   white   clothes.      A sabhã of paramhans,   as   well   as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
26.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked, “What are the characteristics of a sant 
who   is   worthy   of sevã equally   to Bhagvãn?      Well,   such   a sant 
suppresses the actions of Mãyã’s gun (sattva-gun, rajo-gun, and tamo-
gun), such as the indriyas and the antah-karans; but, he himself does 
not  get  suppressed  by  their  actions.    In  addition  to  this,  he  only 
performs  activities  related  to Bhagvãn;  he  is  loyal  in  his  observance 
of  the panch-vartmãn;  and  believing  himself  to  be brahm-rup,  he 
worships Purushottam Bhagvãn.  Such a sant should not be thought of 
as a human being, nor should he be thought of as a dev, because such 
behaviour is  not  possible  for  either  humans  or devs.    In  reality,  even 
though  that sant appears  to  be  human,  he  is  still  worthy  of sevã 
equally  to Bhagvãn.  Therefore,  whoever  desires  to  attain kalyãn 
should  perform  the sevã of  such sant.    Also,  females  should  perform 
sevã of females possessing such qualities.” 
 
26.3 
Then, Ãtmãnand Swãmi asked Shreeji Mahãrãj, “Regardless of how 
ordinary a person may be, as long as he stays within the limits of the 
vartmãns of  this satsang,  he  will  not  become  bound  by  the panch-
vishays.    Please  narrate  the  characteristics  of  a  person  who  cannot 
become  bound  by  the panch-vishays,  even  though  he  may  happen  to 
leave satsang due to unpleasant circumstances.” 
 
26.4 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then  explained,  “If  a  person  has dharma 
predominant in his mind; and if he has the qualities of an ãstik where 
he firmly believes, ‘A person who performs moral and immoral karmas 
in this lok will undoubtedly receive the rewards  of those karmas in the 
lok beyond’; and if he has such firm beliefs, and is concerned about his 
own  reputation  by  thinking, ‘If I do something immoral, what will 
people think of me?’,  then  he  will  not  become  bound  by  any  object 
wherever  he  goes.    For  example,  those  like  Mayã-Rãm  Bhatt,  Mulji 

GADHADÃ III 
- 744 - 
Brahm-Chãri,  and Nishkulãnand  Swãmi  will  never falter  even if  they 
encounter women or wealth. 
 
26.5 
“However, a person who is like this may have the characteristics of 
false ãtmã-nishthã in  thinking, ‘I am the ãtmã; I am brahm; so, I am 
not affected by good or bad actions, and I am absolutely detached from 
everything’.      Also,   he   may   falsely   understand   the   greatness   of 
Bhagvãn,  and  he  may  talk  a  great  deal  about  that  greatness,  by 
saying, ‘The greatness of Bhagvãn is so intense!  So, what harm is there 
in deviating from dharma?’  In such a person, these two types of flaws 
could   become   major   obstacles   in   the   observance   of dharma.  
Therefore, it is better if he has genuine ãtmã-nishthã, if he thoroughly 
understands  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn, and  if  he  firmly  observes  the 
various types of dharma with understanding, and becomes nishkãmi, 
nirlobhi, nisvãdi, nisnehi,  and nirmãni in  order  to  please Bhagvãn.  
Such a person believes, ‘If I follow dharma, Bhagvãn will be extremely 
pleased  with  me;  and  if  I  deviate  from  dharma  in  any  way,  then 
Bhagvãn will be extremely displeased with me’.    If  he  has  this  firm 
belief, then that bhakta will never falter from dharma in any way.  On 
the other hand, if a person does not have this kind of understanding, 
then regardless of how much gnãn he may have, or how much bhakti 
he may offer,  he may still  deviate  from dharma or become  bound  by 
mãyik objects.  This is a fundamental truth.” 
 
26.6 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  again addressed  the sabhã out of compassion:  “I do 
not  like ahankãr.    That ahankãr may be of a person’s qualities of 
bhakti, tyãg,  or vairãgya; of a person’s attainment of the qualities of 
brahm; of a person’s understanding; or of a person’s observance of 
the panch-vartmãn.  I do not like these or any other forms of ahankãr.  
Also,  I  do  not  like dambh.    What  is dambh?    Well,  although  a  person 
may   not   have   much nishchay, bhakti,   or dharma,   to   outwardly 
pretend  to  possess  them  to  a  great  extent  in  order  to  look  good  in 
front of others is dambh.  I do not like that; and nor do I like a person 
who  eliminates  the  difference  between  himself  and Bhagvãn.    I  also 
do not like a person who behaves freely liberally – after taking a vow, 

GADHADÃ III 
- 745 - 
he  adheres  to  it  occasionally  and  relaxes from  it  occasionally.  In 
addition, I do not like a person who considers himself to be extremely 
insignificant after having extensively understood the intense glory of 
Bhagvãn, and  who  does  not  believe  his  true svarup to  be  the ãtmã, 
which is distinct from the body. 
 
26.7 
“Now, I shall describe the type of person I do like.  Such a person 
thoroughly  understands  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn.    He  understands 
his ãtmã – which  is vyatirek from  the  body – to  be brahm-rup.    He 
firmly  observes dharma and  also  engages  in  the bhakti of Bhagvãn.  
Despite having such qualities, if there is some bhakta in satsang who 
does  not  understand  anything,  but  has nishchay in Bhagvãn, then  he 
would   consider   that bhakta to   be   great,   and   himself   to   be 
insignificant  in  comparison  to  that bhakta.    When  speaking,  such  a 
person  never  reveals  even  the  slightest  pride  of  his  wisdom.    I  am 
extremely pleased with a person who behaves in this way.” 
 
26.8 
Having delivered this talk, Shreeji Mahãrãj returned to His residence.  
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 26 || 260 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 27 
All Bliss Is Found In The Murti Of Bhagvãn 
 
27.1 
In the Samvat year 1885, on Kãrtik sud Punam [21
st
 November 1828], 
Swãmi Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in the mandir of Shree 
Gopinãthji in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed 
entirely   in   white   clothes.      A sabhã of paramhans,   as   well   as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
27.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “The pleasures associated with shabda, 
sparsh, rup, ras, and gandh, are all found to exist together in one place 
– in  the  blissful  and divya murti of Purushottam Bhagvãn.    When  we 
have  the darshan of  that murti of Bhagvãn, we  can  enjoy  the  bliss  of 
that  beauty,  as  well as  the  bliss of  the  other four types  of vishays,  all 

GADHADÃ III 
- 746 - 
at  the  same  time.    However,  with  worldly vishays,  when  a  person 
indulges  in  one vishay,  he  receives  the  pleasure  of  only  that vishay, 
but not of the others.  Therefore, the pleasures of worldly vishays are 
found separately.  Moreover, those pleasures are useless, perishable, 
and  the  cause  of  extreme  misery.    However,  in Bhagvãn, a  person 
enjoys  the  bliss  of  all  the vishays at  the  same  time.    That  bliss  is 
extremely divya;   it   is   eternal   and   imperishable.      Therefore,   a 
mumukshu should develop vairãgya towards the worldly vishays and 
become totally attached to the divya and blissful murti of Bhagvãn.” 
 
27.3 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then continued, “If a bhakta has an intense desire to 
engage  in  the bhakti of Bhagvãn and  to  associate  with  His sant, then 
regardless  of  any svabhãv that  he  may  possess,  he  eradicates  it  and 
behaves  according  to  the sant’s wishes.    Even  if  that svabhãv is  such 
that  it  has  become  bound  to  the chaitanya,  a  person  who  has  an 
intense desire to do satsang will eradicate it.”  With that, He narrated 
His own story:  “Initially, my nature was like that of a tyãgi,  but 
because I had an intense desire for the darshan of Rãmãnand Swãmi, 
I  lived  according  to  Muktãnand  Swãmi’s  instructions,  and  not 
according to my personal preferences.” 
 
27.4 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “The details of the kind of determination 
a bhakta should and should not keep are as follows:  The first type of 
determination  is  observing  the  vows,  such  as nishkãmi and nirlobhi; 
the second type of determination is behaving with the feeling that he 
will be able to sleep only if his place is here and not if it is elsewhere.  
The second type and other innumerable forms of determination that 
are  the  result  of  insignificant svabhãvs should  not  be  considered  the 
same   as   the   first   type   of   determination.  The   determination   of 
observing vartmãns is  an  essential  as  a  person’s  own  life;  it  is 
extremely beneficial.  That type of determination should be kept with 
an  understanding  of  its  importance.    But,  if  the  second  type  of 
determination  is  formed,  which  is  due  to svabhãvs,  it  should  be 
thought  of  as  worthless;  and  if  a sant asks  a  person  to  abandon  it, 

GADHADÃ III 
- 747 - 
then    it    should    be    abandoned.        However,    the    first    type    of 
determination should not be abandoned. 
 
27.5 
“To  consider  these  two  forms  of  determination  as  equivalent  is 
foolishness.    For  example,  if  a  child  has  almonds  in  his  fist,  and  if 
someone   attempts   to   make   him   give   them   up,   he   will   not.  
Furthermore,  if  he  has  a  fist  full  of  rupees  or  a  fist full  of  gold  coins, 
and  if someone  attempts to  make  him  give  them up,  he  will  not  give 
them  up.    Therefore,  it  can  be  said  that  the  child  considers  the 
almonds,   and   rupees,   and   the   gold   coins   to   be   of   equal   value.  
Therefore, the child can be considered to be ignorant. 
 
27.6 
“If someone has almonds in his hand, and a thief comes and threatens 
him  by  saying, ‘Put them down, or I will cut off your head with this 
sword’,  then  a  person  who  is  wise  will  give  them away,  but  a  person 
who   is   foolish   will   not.      Similarly,   between   the   two   types   of 
determination, a person should realise which is significant and which 
is  insignificant.    If  someone  does  not  understand  this  and  considers 
both to be equivalent, then he should be known to have a svabhãv of 
stubbornness  and  arrogance.    If  such  a  person  does  observe  the 
vartmãns due  to  that  determination,  and  if  he  remains  in satsang in 
this way till the end, then it is all well and good; but a person cannot 
have complete faith in him.  This is because if he is offended by some 
remarks, or if his self-importance is not maintained, then he will not 
remain  as  he  is.    On  the  other  hand,  a  person  who  offers bhakti to 
Bhagvãn and  observes vartmãns  with  determination  is  called  a 
rãjarshi; and a person who offers bhakti to Bhagvãn while observing 
vartmãns with   the   intention   of   pleasing Bhagvãn is   called   a 
brahmarshi and a sãdhu.  There is a similar difference in the rewards 
of the two as well.” 
 
27.7 
Continuing, Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “The flaws of mãn, irshyã, and 
krodh are much more harmful than even kãm.  This is because a sant 
may  have  compassion  on  a  person  with kãm,  but  he  will  not  have 
compassion  on  person  with mãn.  In  addition, irshyã and krodh 

GADHADÃ III 
- 748 - 
evolve  from mãn.    Therefore, mãn is  a  major  flaw.    Furthermore,  a 
person does not fall from satsang due to kãm as he does due to mãn.  
For  example,  there  are  many grahastha  bhaktas in  our satsang,  and 
they  continue  to  remain  in satsang.    So,  I  always  have  an  intense 
dislike  for mãn, irshyã,  and krodh.    You  will  find  this  verified  in  my 
spoken  words  which have  been  written  down.    Also,  if  you  reflect 
upon them, then you will realise this to be true as well.  Therefore, a 
person should eradicate mãn by realising the greatness of Bhagvãn.” 
 
27.8 
Again, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “What is nishchay in Bhagvãn?    Well, 
consider  how  it  is  in  worldly  life.    Since  childhood,  a  person  has  the 
belief  of  his  parents, varna, and ãshram,  and  gender,  as  well  as  the 
belief that this is an animal, this is a man, this is water, this is fire, this 
is the earth, this is the wind, this is the sky, and so on.  All this is due 
to  the shãstras.    Even  if  a  person  has  not  heard  the shãstras, he  has 
been convinced by principles prevalent in society, which themselves 
were  derived  from  the shãstras.    Similarly,  the  characteristics  of  a 
sant,  who  is  free  of  vicious  natures  like kãm, lobh, mãn, svãd,  and 
moh,  are  also  described  in  the shãstras.    A sant who  possesses  these 
characteristics  has  direct  relationship  with Bhagvãn.    Therefore,  a 
person  should  develop nishchay in Bhagvãn based  on  His words.    In 
fact,  to  have  firm  faith  in  the  words  of  the sant is  itself nishchay in 
Bhagvãn.” 
 
27.9 
Then,  Nãth  Bhakta  of  Vadodarã  asked  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  a  question:  
“Do the relatives of a bhakta of Bhagvãn, who  has  firm nishchay in 
Bhagvãn, attain kalyãn due to their relationship with that bhakta?” 
 
27.10 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “If the relatives or ancestors of a bhakta of 
Bhagvãn have  affection  for  him,  then  yes,  they  will  attain kalyãn; 
otherwise, they will not.  In fact, even if a person who is not related to 
that bhakta has  affection  for  him,  then  he  will  also  benefit.    This  is 
because  at  the  time  of  death,  a  person  may  remember  that bhakta 
whose vrutti is   constantly   fixed   on Bhagvãn.      Therefore,   by 
remembering that bhakta, he attains kalyãn.” 

GADHADÃ III 
- 749 - 
27.11 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “I talk about the nature of the ãtmã and 
about the nature of Bhagvãn.  However, by merely talking about them 
a  person  does  not  experience  their  bliss  as  it  really  is.    Their  true 
bliss can only be experienced in samãdhi, or after a person leaves his 
body;  but  it  cannot  be  experienced  by  merely  talking  about  it.    For 
example,  the  pleasure  of  looking  at  an  attractive  object  can  only  be 
enjoyed by the eyes.  If someone were to praise that pleasure with his 
mouth  by  saying, ‘I saw a very beautiful object’,  then  the  pleasure 
experienced by the mouth is not the same as that experienced by the 
eyes.    Similarly,  a  person  may  attempt  to  praise  with  words  the 
pleasure  of  sounds  heard  by  the  ears,  fragrances  smelt  by  the  nose, 
sensations  felt  by the  skin,  and  flavours  tasted  by  the  tongue,  by 
saying, ‘It was an extremely pleasant smell; it had a delicious taste; it 
felt very good; it sounded nice’.    However,  he  does  not  experience 
pleasure  through  words  as  he  experiences  pleasure  through  the 
indriyas.  
 
27.12
 Similarly, the bliss and the happiness of Bhagvãn that he experiences, 
as well as the bliss and the happiness of the ãtmã that he experiences 
through samãdhi or after leaving the body, cannot be experienced by 
merely  talking  about  them.    However,  if  a  person  performs shravan, 
manan, and nididhyãs on these two topics, then he attains sãkshãtkãr.  
Then,  after  attaining sãkshãtkãr,  he  enjoys  the  same  experience  and 
bliss as he does from these two in samãdhi.  Therefore, after listening 
to  talks  concerning  these  two,  a  person  should  perform manan and 
nididhyãs on those talks.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 27 || 261 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 28 
Falling From The Path Of Bhagvãn’s 
 
28.1 
In  the Samvat year  1885,  on Kãrtik vad 1  [22
nd
 November  1828], 
Swãmi Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in the mandir of Shree 
Gopinãthji in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed 

GADHADÃ III 
- 750 - 
entirely   in   white clothes.      A sabhã of paramhans,   as   well   as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
28.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “There are two ways in which a person 
falls from the bhakti of Bhagvãn.  One way is by listening to shushka-
vedãnti shãstras,  where  he  may consider  the svarup of Shree  Krishna 
Bhagvãn and  other svarups to  be  false,  just  as  he  considers  all  other 
svarups to  be  false.    Such  a shushka-vedãnti should  be  considered  to 
be  extremely  ignorant.    The  other  way  of  falling  is  by  believing, ‘If I 
worship  Bhagvãn,  then  I  will  enjoy  women,  food,  drink,  and  other 
pleasures  of  the  panch-vishays in Golok and Vaikunth’.    Then,  due  to 
the  desires  of  those  pleasures,  he  forgets  even Bhagvãn.    The  fool, 
with his distorted mind, believes, ‘If that enjoyment was not true, then 
Bhagvãn  would  not  associate  with  women  like  Rãdhã  and  Lakshmi,  in 
that dhãm.  So, that pleasure is also true’.    However,  he  does  not 
realise Bhagvãn to be absolutely satisfied and happy within His own 
ãtmã.  In actual fact, such activities of Bhagvãn are for the purpose of 
giving bliss to His own bhaktas.  Therefore, a person should engage in 
bhakti together with gnãn and vairãgya. 
 
28.3 
“A person who has understood the greatness of Bhagvãn realises that 
only Bhagvãn is  all-blissful,  whereas  the  pleasures  derived  from  the 
panch-vishays have  only  a  slight  fraction  of  the  bliss  of Bhagvãn.  
Therefore,  he  would  never  become  attached  to  any  object.    The 
Moksh-Dharma also mentions:  ‘Compared to the bliss of the dhãm of 
Bhagvãn,  the  pleasures  of  the  other loks are like Narak’.    This  is  the 
understanding that a bhakta of Bhagvãn should have.  If he does not 
have  this  understanding,  he  will  fall  away  from Bhagvãn in  the  two 
ways mentioned.” 
 
28.4 
Then, Surã Khãchar asked Shreeji Mahãrãj, “Even after forming firm 
nishchay in Bhagvãn and His sant as they truly are, what is the reason 
for someone to suffer a setback?” 
 
28.5 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “There was some deficiency in that person’s 
nishchay from the moment that he first established it.  What was that 

GADHADÃ III 
- 751 - 
deficiency?    Well,  if  someone  wishes  to  indulge  in  savoury  food  due 
to  a  desire  for  tasting  delicious  food,  and  if Bhagvãn or  His sant 
criticise it, then he will suffer a setback.  Or, if disturbing thoughts of 
kãm still  remain,  and  they  speak  against it;  or if lobh remains, and  if 
they have him criticise his lobh by telling him, ‘Give away your wealth, 
property, land, and farm to someone’, then he will be unable to follow 
this ãgnã.    As  a  result, he  suffers  a  setback.    Or,  if  a  person  has mãn 
and  a sant criticises  it and  insults  him,  then he suffers  a setback  due 
to that as well.  Therefore, a person suffers a setback due to the avgun 
that  still  remain  in  him,  even  though  he  has nishchay in Bhagvãn.  
However,  if  a  person  eradicates  his avgun at  the  beginning,  when  he 
establishes his nishchay, then he will not suffer a setback.  At present, 
if  those  who  possess  these avgun thoughtfully  keep antar-drashti, 
they will be able to realise, ‘I am weak in this aspect.  So, if I am asked 
to  follow  such  an  ãgnã  I  will  fall  back  from  satsang  and  become  a 
vimukh’.  In this way, they can understand themselves completely.” 
 
28.6 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  asked  Brahmãnand  Swãmi,  Shuk  Muni,  and 
Surã Khãchar a question:  “What avgun do you possess which would 
cause you to suffer a setback?” 
 
28.7 
The three of them answered, “Mahãrãj, we have the avgun of mãn.  As 
a  result,  if  a sãdhu of  an  equal  status  to  us  insults  us,  we  become 
somewhat disturbed.” 
 
28.8 
Hearing  this,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  commented,  “A  person  may  have 
realised Bhagvãn with  the  knowledge of  His  greatness  as  mentioned 
in the shlok: 
 
dyupataya eva ten a yayur-antam anantatayã 
tvamapi yad-antarãnda-nichayã nanu sãvaranãhã 
Even the masters of the higher loks cannot understand your greatness, 
because it is endless.  Neither can you yourself understand your own greatness.  
In your each and every hair, countless brahmãnds and their barriers (jad 
prakruti) fly simultaneously at immense speed – like specks of dust flying in 
the air.  Even the Shrutis, ultimately perish in you, and fail to praise your glory. 

GADHADÃ III 
- 752 - 
 “If a person has realised Bhagvãn in  this  way,  then  how  can  he  keep 
mãn, irshyã, or krodh towards  a sãdhu of  such  a Bhagvãn?    If  he  still 
does,  then there  is  a  flaw  in  his  understanding.    For  example,  if  a 
person understands the authority of a governor – that he is the ruler 
of  the  whole  world  and  that  he  is  extremely  powerful – then  even  if 
one  of  his  pauper-like  servants  were  to  come,  even  a  great  king 
would  obey his  orders  and  act  according  to  what  he  is  told.    This  is 
because  the  king  has  understood, ‘He is the servant of the powerful 
governor’.  After all, a person’s mãn does  not  continue  in  front  of 
someone  who  is  more  powerful  than  himself.    Similarly,  if  a  person 
has  understood Bhagvãn to  be  the  master  of  all  divine  powers  and 
wealth, then how can he retain mãn before a sant?” 
 
28.9 
Brahmãnand Swãmi agreed, “Mahãrãj, what you are saying is correct.  
If a person has realised Bhagvãn and the knowledge of His greatness, 
then he will never develop mãn, irshyã, or krodh towards a sant.” 
 
28.10 
Shreeji Mahãrãj continued, “Uddhavji was so great and so intelligent.  
However,  because  he  had  understood  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn, he 
asked to be reborn as a vine so that he could be touched by the dust 
from  the  feet  of  the gopis who  were  greatly  attached  to Bhagvãn.  
Therefore, it is stated: 
 
ãsãm-ahe charana-renu-jushãm-aham syãm 
vrundãvane kimapi gulma-latausha-dheenãm 
yã dustyajam svajanam-ãrya-patham cha  
hitvã bhejur-mukunda-padaveem shruti-bhir-vimru-gyãm 
Those gopis – having abandoned the bond of their bodily relations and the 
path of dharma as prescribed for the nobles – attained the state of Bhagvãn, 
which even the Shrutis seek.  May I also become any of the shrubs, vines, or 
herbs in Vrundãvan that are touched by the dust of their feet. 
 
 “Even Brahmã has said, 
 
aho bhãgyam-aho bhãgyam nanda-gopa-vrajaukasãm 
yan-mitram paramã-nandam purnam brahma sanãtanam 
How fortunate is Nand, the cowherds, and the residents of Vraj – whose friend 
was the alokik, eternal, perfect, and blissful Bhagvãn. 

GADHADÃ III 
- 753 - 
8.11
 “As he had understood the greatness of Bhagvãn, even Brahmã spoke 
in this way.  Therefore, if a person realises the greatness of Bhagvãn 
and His sant in this way, mãn, irshyã, or krodh can no longer persist.  
Moreover,  he  would  behave  as  a dãs of dãs before  them;  and  no 
matter  however  much  they  insult  him,  he  would  never  think  of 
leaving  their  company  and  going  away.    Also,  he  would  never  feel in 
his mind, ‘How long should I tolerate this?  I will just stay at home and 
engage  in  worship  there’.      Therefore,   if   a   person   understands 
Bhagvãn’s greatness in such a way, mãn is eradicated.” 
 
28.12 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “If a bhakta of Bhagvãn were placed 
on  a shuli due  to  some karma of  his,  and  if  at  that  time  I  were 
standing  next  to  him,  the bhakta would  still  not  think, ‘It would be 
good if Bhagvãn would free me from the pain of this shuli’.  In this way, 
he  is  not  concerned  about  his  own  physical  comforts.    Instead,  he 
endures  the  difficulties  that  fall  upon  him.    As  a  result, Bhagvãn 
becomes  extremely  pleased  with  such  a bhakta who  is  free  of  all 
expectations.” 
 
28.13 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “I shall now describe who attains the bliss 
related  to Bhagvãn.    First,  consider  the  following  analogy:    Water  is 
the  very  life  of  a  fish.    As  long  as  it remains  in  water,  it  is  able  to 
move,  swim,  and  perform  all  its  activities;  but  the  moment  it  leaves 
the water, it loses its life and dies.  Similarly, if a person believes the 
panch-vishays to  be  his  lifeline  and  believes  them  to  be  a  source  of 
happiness, then when he is separated from them, he becomes almost 
like  a  dead  person.    Such  a  person  can  never  attain  the  bliss  of 
Bhagvãn.    In  fact,  only  a  person  who  does  not  believe  the panch-
vishays to  be  his  lifeline  experiences Bhagvãn’s bliss;  only  he  is  able 
to indulge in the bliss; and only he attains that bliss.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 28 || 262 || 
 

GADHADÃ III 
- 754 - 
Gadhadã III – 29 
A Tyãgi And Grahastha With Moderate Vairãgya 
 
29.1 
In  the Samvat year  1885,  on  the  night  of Posh sud 2  [7
th
 January 
1829],  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was sitting  on  a decorated bedstead  that had 
been  placed  on  the  platform  in  front  of  the medi in Dãdã Khãchar’s 
darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A 
sabhã of sãdhus,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had 
gathered before Him. 
 
29.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked Shuk Muni a question:  “Suppose there 
are  two satsangis.    Both  are  twenty  years  of  age,  and  both  possess 
nishchay, sneh, bhakti, vairãgya,  and dharma to  an  equal  extent.  
However, due to prãrabdha, one of them married, whereas the other 
did  not  find  anyone  and  so  remained  a sãnkhya-yogi.    He  also  had  a 
desire  to  marry,  but  he  could  not  find  someone.    Since  neither  of 
them  had intense vairãgya from  the  beginning,  both  have  an  intense 
desire  for  indulging  in  the vishays.    Then,  the  question  is  whose 
desire  will  be  calmed:  the grahastha or  the sãnkhya-yogi?    When 
replying,  keep  in  mind  that  the  Veds  state: ‘Only a person who has 
intense   vairãgya   should   become   a   tyãgi   from   the   brahm-chãrya 
ãshram;  whereas  a  person  whose  vairãgya  is  feeble  should  become  a 
grahastha  for  the  purpose  of  diminishing  his  intense  desire  to  indulge 
in  the  vishays.    Only  then should he  accept  the  vãnprasth  ãshram,  and 
then the sannyãs ashram’.  Therefore, answer carefully.” 
 
29.3 
Shuk Muni attempted to answer the question but was unable to do so 
satisfactorily. 
 
29.4 
Answering  the  question  Himself,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “The 
grahastha is good, and the other who is a sãnkhya-yogi is bad.  This is 
because  he  lacks  intense vairãgya.    As  a  result,  he  does  not  realise 
that the vishays are worthless and false.  Also, for the same reason, he 
has no firmness in his ãtmã-nishthã.  For this reason, if he happens to 
leave satsang and  encounter vishays,  he  will  become  attached  to 

GADHADÃ III 
- 755 - 
them.    However,  if  he  does  not  come  across vishays,  he  will  be 
compelled   to   come   back   into satsang.      On   the   other   hand,   the 
grahastha will  progress  even  if  he  has  the darshan of  a sãdhu once 
every six months.  Therefore, it is not appropriate for a person who is 
deficient  in vairãgya to  become  a tyãgi;  it  is  only  appropriate  for 
someone  who  has  intense vairãgya.    If  someone  who  is  deficient  in 
vairãgya does   become   a tyãgi,   then   his tyãg will   not   continue 
throughout his life.  After one year, two years, or after even ten years, 
difficulties will definitely arise in his tyãg.” 
 
29.5 
Then, Shuk Muni raised a doubt.  He questioned, “Mahãrãj, if the 
person  whose vairãgya is  weak  listens  to  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn 
from a sãdhu and thinks over it in his mind, then will he not develop 
intense vairãgya?      In   fact,   only   very   few   people,   due   to   their 
prãrabdha, have intense vairãgya from the beginning.  Generally, we 
see that a person develops vairãgya even though he did not possess it 
initially.  How should this be understood?” 
 
29.6 
Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “The answer to that is that a person can 
never  develop  intense vairãgya merely  by  thinking  by  himself, or  by 
any other means for that matter.  However, if a person develops love 
for  a  great sant who  possesses  the  four  qualities  of dharma, gnãn, 
vairãgya,   and bhakti,   then   all   the   actions   he   performs   (seeing, 
listening,  talking)  will  be  performed  according  to  the  wishes  of  that 
great sant; he will not do anything which is against the sant’s wish.  In 
his mind, he constantly fears behaving against the wishes of that sant, 
and  feels, ‘If I do not behave according to his wish, then he will not 
maintain love for me’.    That  is  why  such  a  person  will  constantly 
behave  according  to  the sant’s wishes.    Therefore,  if  someone  has 
developed such  attachment  for  a sant,  then  even  if  he  does  not  have 
vairãgya, his tyãg will remain till the end. 
 
29.7 
“In our satsang,  all  the  males,  females,  and paramhans,  are  attached 
to  me.    Also,  all  the  females  observe vartmãns to  the  same  extent  as 
the  three  senior  females  (Lãdu-Bã,  Jeevu-Bã,  and  Rãj-Bãi).    This  is 

GADHADÃ III 
- 756 - 
because  in  their  mind,  they  realise, ‘If we do not remain alert and 
observe  the  vartmãns,  the  love  which  Mahãrãj  has  for  us  will  not 
remain, and He will become unhappy’.  The paramhans also behave in 
the  same  way.    In  fact,  it  is  the  same  for  all  the  other satsangis, 
brahm-chãris and pãrshads.    All  the  male  and  female bhaktas living 
far and wide are also alert in observing the vartmãns; they too feel, ‘If 
we  do  not  behave  properly,  Mahãrãj  will  become  displeased.’  
Therefore,  all  of  them  strictly  observe dharma out  of  love  for  me, 
even though they may possess vairãgya to a greater or lesser degree. 
 
29.8 
“However, when I recently fell ill in Panchãlã, if something serious 
had  happened  to  me,  then  everyone’s  firmness  would  not  have 
remained  as  it  is  now.    At  such  a  time,  a  person  who  has  intense 
vairãgya can  remain  within dharma;  or  a  person  who  has  lovingly 
attached  his jeev to  a  person  who  has  intense vairãgya can  remain 
within dharma;  or  a  person  who  keeps  contact  with satsang and, 
realising Bhagvãn to  be antaryãmi,  behaves  according  to  the niyams 
that   have   been   prescribed   for   him,   can   remain   within dharma.  
Except  for  these,  others  cannot  remain  within dharma.    Therefore, 
what  I  have  just  explained  is  the  only  answer  to  the  question  I  had 
asked.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 29 || 263 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 30 
Constant Awareness Of Five Thoughts 
 
30.1 
In  the Samvat year  1885,  on Posh sud Punam [19
th
 January  1829], 
Swãmi Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj was sitting in the mandir of Shree 
Gopinãthji in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed 
entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
30.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Two beliefs which I like, and by which 
my  mind  becomes  calm,  are  as  follows:    First,  I  like  a  person  who  is 

GADHADÃ III 
- 757 - 
firmly   convinced   that   there   is   a   mass   of   divine   light   which   is 
chaitanya,  and  that  the murti of Shree  Purushottam  Bhagvãn forever 
resides  at  the  centre  of  that  mass  of  light;  and  with  that  belief,  he 
worships and offers bhakti to that Bhagvãn.  On the other hand, I do 
not  like  a  person  who  believes  in  and  worships  only  the chaitanya 
divine  light;  nor  do  I  like  a  person  who  does  not  believe Bhagvãn to 
forever  possess  a svarup; nor  do  I  like  a  person  who  does  not 
worship Bhagvãn.  Secondly, I like a person who performs in tap, and 
yog,  has vairãgya and  hatred  towards  the panch-vishays,  in  order  to 
please Bhagvãn – without  any  form  of  pretence.    Seeing  such  a 
person,   my   mind   becomes   pleased,   and   I   feel, ‘He  should  be 
congratulated for behaving in that way’. 
 
30.3 
“In addition, I have constant awareness of these five thoughts:  First, I 
am certainly  going  to  die and  leave  this  body.    In  fact, I  firmly  feel, ‘I 
am going to die at this second, at this very moment’.   Such  awareness 
remains in times of happiness and distress, pleasure and displeasure, 
and  amidst  all  activities.   That  is  the  type  of vairãgya I  possess.   The 
second  thought  is  the  constant  awareness  that  even  though  death  is 
certain,  this  much  work  is  left,  which  I  would  like  to  complete.   The 
third is thought of whether or not desires for the panch-vishays have 
been  eradicated  from  my  mind.  I  feel, ‘If they have been eradicated, 
then why does activity regarding that vishay still occur?  What if maybe 
they  have  not  been  eradicated?’  In   this way,   I   am   constantly 
suspicious of the mind.  The fourth thought is the concern of whether 
or  not  Muktãnand  Swãmi  and  the  other  senior sãdhus and  senior 
bhaktas have eradicated their desires for the panch-vishays.  In fact, I 
am  constantly  aware  of  looking into everyone’s hearts to observe, 
‘This person’s worldly desires have been removed, but this person’s 
have not’.  Finally, the fifth thought is that if I become unhappy, then 
who  knows  where  I  would  run  away  to!    I  would  probably  leave  my 
body.    Therefore,  I  believe  I  should  not  become  unhappy.    This  is 
because  it  is  good  that  by  my association  all  these men, women, and 
paramhans happily  sit  to  engage  in  the bhakti of Bhagvãn.    Seeing 
them  engaged  in  such bhakti,  I  become  extremely  pleased  in  my 

GADHADÃ III 
- 758 - 
mind.  I feel, ‘Everyone must die someday, but to perform bhakti in this 
way is the only great benefit of living’.  I am constantly aware of this.” 
 
30.4 
In  this  way,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  described  His  own  behaviour  as  an 
example  for  the  benefit  of  His bhaktas,  while  in  actual  fact,  He 
Himself is the pratyaksha svarup of Shree Purushottam Nãrãyan. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 30 || 264 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 31 
The Murti On Earth And The Murti In Akshardhãm 
 
31.1 
In the Samvat year 1885, on the evening of Mahã sud 4 [7
th
 February 
1829],  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on  the 
veranda  outside  the  west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Gadhadã.  He had tied a white feto around His head and was wearing 
a  white khes.    He  had  also  covered  Himself  with  a  red-bordered, 
white,  English  cloth.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas 
from   various   places,   had   gathered   before   Him.      Some   of   the 
paramhans were  singing kirtans to  the  accompaniment  of  musical 
instruments.  
 
31.2 
After  the paramhans sang  the kirtan ‘Hari Mere Hãralaki Lakari...’, 
Shreeji Mahãrãj requested, “Please sing ‘Jamunã Ke Teer Thãdo...’.”  
The paramhans then  began  singing  that kirtan.    In  the  meantime, 
Shreeji Mahãrãj sat thinking. 
 
31.3 
Then, He interrupted, “Please stop singing, and  allow  me  to  talk  to 
you.  What I am about to reveal to you is not much, but it can be very 
beneficial for those who practice dhyãn.  In fact, I have never revealed 
this matter before.”  Then, closing His gentle eyes, He began thinking, 
and then said, “There  is  a  mass  of  divine  light  that  is  like  countless 
millions  of  moons,  suns,  and  flames  of  fire.    That  mass  of  light 
appears  to  be  like  an  ocean.    The svarup of Purushottam  Bhagvãn 
resides  within  that  luminous, brahm-rup dhãm of Bhagvãn, and  He 
Himself assumes an avatãr from that murti. 

GADHADÃ III 
- 759 - 
31.4 
“What  is  that Bhagvãn like?    Well,  He  is  greater  than  both  the 
perishable  and  the  imperishable;  He  is  the  cause  of  all  causes;  and 
countless millions of akshar-rup muktas worship His holy feet.  Out of 
compassion,   that   very   same Bhagvãn is pratyaksha and   present 
before  your  eyes  in  an  incarnated murti for  the  purpose  of  granting 
ultimate kalyãn of jeevs.      Therefore,   there   is   a   great   similarity 
between   the murti residing   in   the dhãm of Bhagvãn and   this 
pratyaksha murti of Shree Krishna. 
 
31.5 
“The vision of a person who performs dhyãn on  this  human murti of 
Shree  Krishna develops  extreme vairãgya for  all  charming  sights 
other  than Bhagvãn and  remains  engrossed  only  in  the  charm  of 
Bhagvãn.    Then,  he  does not  notice  even  the  slightest  difference 
between the pratyaksha murti of Bhagvãn and the murti in His dhãm.  
The appearance and age of that murti, and the appearance and age of 
this murti will  appear  similar.    In  addition,  the  height  and  build  of 
that murti will appear to be exactly the same as that of this murti; not 
even  the  slightest  difference  can  be  perceived  between  that murti 
and  this murti.    Also,  there  appears  to  be  a  total  oneness  between 
them.  In this way, there is not even the slightest difference between 
that murti and this murti.  In fact, both are one. 
 
31.6 
“When a person performs dhyãn on that pratyaksha murti outwardly, 
in front of the eyes, there is not the slightest difference between that 
murti and  this murti.    However,  if  he  looks  at  that  same murti 
inwardly, within his eyes, then that same murti does not appear to be 
the same as before.  In this case, it becomes the same size as the pupil 
of  the  eye.    Then,  when  he  performs dhyãn and  looks  inward  at  the 
point of his throat and below, he does not see that same murti as the 
two murtis he   saw   before.      He   sees   that   same murti as   being 
extremely    large,    extremely    tall,    extremely    fat,    and    extremely 
frightening.  For example, the shadow of a man formed by the sun at 
noon would be almost the same length as the man’s body.  But when 
that same sun sets, the shadow becomes very elongated – it does not 
remain the same length as the man’s body.    Similarly,  the murti of 

GADHADÃ III 
- 760 - 
Bhagvãn also becomes as large as mentioned previously.  Then, when 
the  person  sees  that murti within  the buddhi,  which  resides  in  the 
heart,  and  when  he  sees  that murti within  his  own jeev within  the 
buddhi, he sees the murti as being the size of a thumb.  It appears to 
have two arms or four arms, but he does not see it in the three ways 
that he saw before.  Then, while performing dhyãn, he sees the murti 
to be greater than his jeev and sees it in the midst of a mass of divine 
light  which  is  like  that  of  countless  millions  of  suns,  moons,  and 
flames of fire.  Also, he sees that murti to be just like the murti that he 
saw   before   his   eyes;   he   does   not   perceive   even   the   slightest 
difference between the two. 
 
31.7 
“Therefore, the same murti that is in Akshardhãm – which is gunãtit – 
is pratyaksha.    There  is  no  difference  between  the  two.    Just  as  the 
murti in  the dhãm is gunãtit,  the  human murti is  also gunãtit.    The 
difference  which  was  noticed  earlier  was  due  to  the gun of  the 
different  locations  within  the  body – in  the  eyes  there  is sattva-gun; 
in the throat there is rajo-gun; even the jeev, which resides within the 
buddhi, is full of gun.” 
 
31.8 
After   delivering  this  talk,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “Please  continue 
singing the kirtan which you were singing earlier.” 
 
31.9 
In  this  way,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  revealed  Himself  as Purushottam using 
the non-pratyaksha svarup of Bhagvãn as an example. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 31 || 266 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 32 
Committing Sins Under The Excuse Of Bhagvãn’s Greatness 
 
32.1 
In the Samvat year 1885, on Mahã sud 5 [8
th
 February 1829], Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  decorated  bedstead  on 
the veranda outside the west-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr 
in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of 

GADHADÃ III 
- 761 - 
munis,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places,  had  gathered 
before  Him.    Some  of  the paramhans were  singing kirtans related  to 
the spring season. 
 
32.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked Muktãnand Swãmi and the other sãdhus, 
“Please explain the meaning of the shlok: 
 
 vishayã vinivartante nirãhãrasya dehinaha   
 The sense objects recede for a person who refrains from indulging in them.  
However, the longing for them does not subside.  The longing subsides when 
his vision reaches Bhagvãn’s. 
 
32.3 
The sãdhus then  explained  the shlok according  to  the  commentary 
written by Rãmãnuj Ãchãrya. 
 
32.4 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then added, “With reference to that shlok,  I  have 
formed the belief that a person who is in his youth should reduce his 
diet and should eat and behave moderately.  When a person’s diet is 
reduced,   physical   strength   also   diminishes.      Only   then   can   the 
indriyas be  overcome;  otherwise  they  cannot.    Having  done  that,  if  a 
person  enthusiastically  engages  his  mind  in  the  nine  types  of bhakti 
of Bhagvãn, and  himself  lovingly  engages  in bhakti,  then  he  will 
remain in satsang till the end.  But, if he does not behave in this way, 
he  will  surely  surrender  to  his indriyas and,  sooner  or  later,  he  will 
fall  from satsang.    Even  a  person  who  has  mastered samãdhi,  like 
Sheth Govardhan, is afraid of this; so what can be said for others? 
 
32.5 
”However, a person’s diet cannot be controlled by merely observing 
several upvãs consecutively.    This  only  leads  to  his  desires  and  diet 
increasing, because when he breaks an upvãs, he tends to eat twice as 
much.  However, if a person begins to reduce his diet gradually, it can 
be controlled.  For example, even though the clouds cause rain to fall 
in  tiny  drops,  water  still  collects  in  a  large  quantity.    Similarly,  a 
person should control his diet gradually.  As a result, his indriyas will 
also  be  controlled.    Then,  if  he  lovingly  engages  in bhakti,  he  will 
remain in satsang till the end.  This is a fact.” 

GADHADÃ III 
- 762 - 
32.6 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then said, “How does a true bhakta of Bhagvãn 
understand Bhagvãn’s greatness?    Well,  he  believes, ‘Bhagvãn, who 
possesses a definite murti, forever resides in His luminous Akshardhãm.  
He  is  the  cause  and  controller  of  everything,  the  antaryãmi  within  all 
and  the  supreme  lord  of  countless  millions  of  brahmãnds.    Moreover, 
His   murti   is   divine,   blissful,   and   free   from the  gun  of  Mãyã’.  
Understanding  the pratyaksha Bhagvãn in  this  way,  he  believes  that 
with   the   exception   of Bhagvãn, all   other   worldly   objects   are 
absolutely worthless and perishable.  In addition, he has love only for 
Bhagvãn, and he engages in the nine types of bhakti.  He also believes, 
‘Kãl, Mãyã, Brahmã, Shiv, Surya, and Chandra, are powerful, yet even 
they act according to the niyams of that extremely great Bhagvãn’.  
Understanding  this,  he  always  behaves  within  the niyams of dharma 
established  by Bhagvãn in  order  to  please  Him;  he  never  disobeys 
those niyams. 
 
32.7 
“On the other hand, a person who has a corrupted mind believes, 
‘Such a great Bhagvãn is patit-pãvan  and  adham-udhãran.    So,  why 
worry  about  slightly  disobeying  the  niyam  of  dharma?    After  all, 
Bhagvãn is capable of granting kalyãn’.    In  this  way,  he  does  not 
hesitate  in  committing  sins  under  the  pretext  of  knowing Bhagvãn’s 
greatness.    Such  a  person  should  be  considered  wicked  and  sinful.  
Also,  even  though  he  may  superficially  appear  to be  a bhakta,  he 
should  not  be  considered  a bhakta,  and  a  person  should  not  remain 
in his company.  Only a person who has the understanding described 
previously   should   be   considered   to   be   a bhakta,   and   only   his 
company should be kept.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 32 || 266 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 33 
All Are Affected By Wealth And Women 
 
33.1 
In the Samvat year 1885, on Fãgan sud 11 [16
th
 March 1829], Swãmi 
Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   in   the mandir of Shree 

GADHADÃ III 
- 763 - 
Gopinãthji in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed 
entirely   in   white   clothes.      A sabhã of paramhans,   as   well   as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
33.2 
Then, addressing all the paramhans, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “In satsang, 
there  are  only  a  few bhaktas whose mind  would  not  be  affected  by 
wealth,  property,  women,  and  children,  and  who  would  not  develop 
faith  in  those  who  fulfil  the  desires  related  to  those  things.    In  fact, 
there cannot be many bhaktas who are like this.”  Saying this, Shreeji 
Mahãrãj continued, “This Muktãnand Swãmi and Gopãlãnand Swãmi 
are  like  that,  because  in  no  way  would  they  become  impressed  by 
anyone,  no  matter  how  great  he  may  be,  and  not  even  if  he  were  to 
perform miracles. 
 
33.3 
“What are the characteristics of a person who will not be influenced 
by  anyone?    Well,  such  a  person  believes, ‘I am the ãtmã, which is 
distinct  from  the  body;  I  am  luminous  and  eternal.    Moreover,  the 
pratyaksha  svarup  of  Bhagvãn  constantly  resides  within  my  own  self.  
Except  for  the  svarup  of  Bhagvãn,  all worldly  svarups  are  asatya  and 
full of countless flaws’.    A  person  who  has  such vairãgya and  who 
thoroughly  understands  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn will  never  have 
any   kind   of   doubts   in   his   mind.      But   having   said   that,   this 
understanding is very difficult to develop. 
 
33.4
 “Even though these two sãdhus are so great, if they were to receive a 
great amount of honour, or if heaps of rupees and gold coins were to 
be  placed  before  them,  or  if  they  were  to  come  across  attractive 
women,  then  even  though  they are tyãgis,  they  would  not  be  able  to 
maintain  their dharma.    In  fact,  if  they  do  encounter  those  objects, 
then  it  is  doubtful  whether  they  would  remain  equal  with  even  the 
lowest of our tyãgis.  This is because that is effect of the association of 
those  objects.  For  example,  see  how  religious  all  of  us  sitting  here 
are.    However,  if  we  were  to  drink  bottles  of  liquor,  we  would  not 
remain  so  composed.    Similarly,  the  association  of  those  objects 
certainly  has  an  effect  on  a  person.    Therefore,  a  person  can  only  be 

GADHADÃ III 
- 764 - 
saved  from  those  objects  if  he  does  not  associate  with  them.    He 
should be cautious from the beginning, in case he comes across them.  
Moreover, it is a well-known fact of the shãstras that only Bhagvãn is 
unaffected by their association.  That is why it has been stated:  
 
rushim nãrãyanam-rute... 
Of the progeny of Brahmã (Marichi), and their progeny (Kashyap), and their 
progeny (humans and devs) – whose mind in this world, besides that of 
Nãrãyan Rushi, can be distinguished as being unaffected by the mãyã and 
attractive charm of women? 
 
... ye-nye svataha parihrutãd-api bibhyati sma 
O Master of the indriyas (Bhagvãn)!  You are indeed the lord of the whole 
mobile and immobile world, because even though you indulge in the various 
sense objects created by the imbalance in the gun of Mãyã, you remain 
unaffected by them.  Apart from you, others still fear the association of the 
sense objects – even though they have renounced them. 
 
33.5 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Who can be called an ekãntik bhakta of 
Bhagvãn?    Well,  a  person  who  possesses  the  qualities  of svadharma, 
gnãn, vairãgya,  and  unparalleled bhakti towards Bhagvãn coupled 
with knowledge of his greatness, can be called an ekãntik bhakta. 
 
33.6 
“Furthermore, regarding the ultimate fate of an ekãntik  bhakta,  it  is 
said the he ‘enters’ Bhagvãn.  But what is meant by ‘entering’?  Well, 
that bhakta has  love  for  the divya murti of Bhagvãn,  who  dwells 
within  a  mass  of  divine  light.    Due  to  that  love,  he  has  constant 
awareness of  the murti of Bhagvãn in  his mind,  and  he  behaves as if 
he  is  infatuated  by  that murti.    Remaining  in  that  state,  he  also 
engages  in  the  service  of Bhagvãn outwardly.    For  example,  even 
though Lakshmiji remains  in  the  heart  of Bhagvãn symbolically  and 
through  her  profound  love,  she  also  outwardly  serves  him  in  the 
svarup of a female.  The ‘entering’ of an ekãntik bhakta into Bhagvãn 
should be understood in a similar way. 
 
33.7 
“Even at present, the attachment a bhakta has  for  the  ten  types  of 
bhakti as  well  as  the  attachment  he has  for svadharma, vairãgya, 

GADHADÃ III 
- 765 - 
ãtmã-nishthã,   keeping   the   company   of   a sant and   realising   the 
greatness  of Bhagvãn is  such  that  he  can  in  no  way  do  without  it.  
Even though opium is extremely bitter, a person who is addicted to it 
cannot live without it.  Or, if a person is addicted to alcohol, then even 
though  his  throat  burns  whenever  he  drinks  alcohol,  he  cannot  live 
without it.  Even if someone were to offer him many rupees he would 
not  accept  them,  because  his  addiction  is  dearer  to  him.    This  is 
because that addiction has become ingrained in his jeev.  Similarly, if 
a  person  was  addicted  to  the bhakti of Bhagvãn and  other  such 
activities,  then even  if  he remains  under  the influence  of  any  type of 
kusang,  he  would  not  be  able  to  live  without  engaging  in bhakti.  
Moreover,  his  mind  would  not  be  pleased  in  engaging  in  any  other 
activities.      Such   a bhakta of Bhagvãn,   whose jeev has   become 
engrossed  in Bhagvãn’s bhakti and  other  such  activities,  and  who  is 
extremely  eager  to  perform  only  those  activities,  can also  be  said  to 
have ‘entered’ Bhagvãn. 
 
33.8 
“So, what are the characteristics of such a bhakta of Bhagvãn?    Well, 
except  for  the sevã of Bhagvãn, if  he  does  not  wish  for  even  the  four 
types  of mukti,  how  can  he  desire  anything  else?    Such  a  person 
should  be  known  as  an ekãntik bhakta because  he  has  no  desire  for 
anything.  A person who is not like this sometimes enjoys engaging in 
the bhakti of Bhagvãn’s;  but  if  he  encounters  evil  company,  he  will 
forget bhakti and  begin  to  behave  immorally.    Such  a  person  should 
be  known  to  be  a  fake bhakta and  a  person  who  believes  himself  to 
be the body.  He is not a true bhakta and cannot be trusted.” 
 
33.9 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  continued,  “If  a bhakta of Bhagvãn is 
vulnerable  to  women,  wealth, svabhãvs,  and  the  belief  that  he  is  the 
body,  then  even  if he  is  engaged  in  the bhakti of Bhagvãn, his bhakti 
cannot  be  trusted;  he  will  surely  encounter  obstacles  in  it.    This  is 
because if at some time he happens to come across women or wealth, 
then  there  will  be  no  stability  in  his bhakti,  and  he  will  become 
engrossed in them.  Also, if a person believes himself to be the body, 
then when he suffers due to some illness, or if he is unable to obtain 

GADHADÃ III 
- 766 - 
food and clothing, or if a ãgnã to observe a difficult vartmãn is given, 
then  again,  his bhakti will  be  disturbed.    In  fact,  he  will  become 
frustrated  and  will  not  be  able  to  think;  he  will  begin  to  behave 
immorally.  Also, if he has a certain svabhãv, and if a sant lectures him 
instead  of  allowing  him  to  behave  according  to  his svabhãv,  and 
makes him behave opposite to it, then also he will become disturbed.  
Then,  if  he  cannot  remain  in  the  company  of  a sant,  how  will  he  be 
able to maintain bhakti?  Therefore, a person who wishes to develop 
firm bhakti should not be vulnerable in these four aspects.  If there is 
a    flaw    in    these    four,    it    should    be    slowly    eradicated    with 
understanding.    Only  then  can  a  person  perform  constant bhakti of 
Bhagvãn.  What I have just said is absolutely true; there is no doubt in 
it whatsoever.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 33 || 267 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 34 
Maintaining Desires Only For Bhagvãn’s 
Expressing Anger At Those Who Disobey The Niyams Of Dharma 
 
34.1 
In  the Samvat year  1885,  on Chaitra sud 3  [6
th
 April  1829],  Swãmi 
Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   in   the mandir of Shree 
Gopinãthji in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed 
entirely   in   white   clothes.      A sabhã of paramhans,   as   well   as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
34.2 
Then, Shuk Muni asked Shreeji Mahãrãj, “There appear to be two 
means by which desires for only Bhagvãn remain, and desires for any 
worldly  object  do  not  remain.    One  is  love  for Bhagvãn, and  other  is 
vairãgya coupled with gnãn.  These are the two means.  For a person 
who  does  not  practise  these  two  means  firmly,  but  who  does  have 
nishchay in Bhagvãn and the belief of Bhagvãn, is there a third means 
by  which  he  can  maintain  desires  only  for Bhagvãn and  not  for 
anything else?” 

GADHADÃ III 
- 767 - 
34.3 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said in reply, “That is a good question because 
it  is  true  that  only  by  those  two  means  do  desires  only  for Bhagvãn 
remain, and desires for any worldly object do not remain.  If a person 
does not practice those two means, then his desires for objects other 
than Bhagvãn will not be eradicated.  As a result, he remains unhappy 
in  life.    But,  since  he  has nishchay in Bhagvãn, he  will  be  granted 
kalyãn by Bhagvãn after death. 
 
34.4 
“However, just like those two means, there is also a third means for 
eradicating desires for objects other than Bhagvãn.  What is it?  Well, 
it  is  to  vigilantly  observe  the  prescribed niyams.    What  are  those 
niyams?  Some are svadharma niyams, that are related to the duties of 
a person’s varna and ashram.    Just  as  there  are niyams for  an ãtmã-
nivedi sãdhu and a brahm-chãri, similarly, even though a person is not 
an ãtmã-nivedi, he should still follow the niyams of not seeing women 
and not listening to talks about them.  In this way, he should strictly 
and attentively observe the niyams related to abandoning the panch-
vishays.    Also,  he  should  physically  serve Bhagvãn and  His bhaktas, 
and  he  should  listen  to kathãs related  to Bhagvãn.  In  this  way,  if  he 
observes niyams in  the  form  of  engaging  in  the  nine  types  of bhakti, 
then  his  mind  will  also  begin  to  think  about good  thoughts.    So,  if  a 
person behaves according to these two niyams, then as a result, even 
if  he  does  not  have vairãgya or  love  for Bhagvãn, they  will  develop; 
he  will  become  extremely  powerful;  impure  desires  for  objects  will 
be eradicated; and only desires for Bhagvãn will flourish day by day.” 
 
34.5 
Again, Shuk Muni asked, “Mahãrãj, it seems krodh arises  when  a 
person’s desire for a certain object or his sense of ‘my-ness’ for 
something is violated by someone.  When a desire, such as a craving, 
is  not  satisfied,  then  that  desire  results  in krodh.    So,  it  can  be  said 
that such a person has developed a svabhãv in which krodh can arise.  
Is it possible that krodh will not arise even in such situations?” 
 
34.6 
Shreeji Mahãrãj replied, “A great sant,  due  to Bhagvãn’s ãgnã or  by 
his  own  wish  after  understanding Bhagvãn’s greatness  according  to 

GADHADÃ III 
- 768 - 
the shãstras, may have made a firm decision to keep countless people 
within  the niyams of dharma,  and  to  lead  them  onto  the  path  of 
Bhagvãn.  This sant may express anger on a person who disobeys the 
niyam of dharma and  follows adharma.    If  the sant does  not  express 
anger  and  does  not  lecture  that  person  in  order  to  teach  him  to 
remain  within  the niyams of dharma,  then  that  person  will  continue 
to  disobey  those niyams and  will  not  progress.    Therefore,  anger 
expressed  for  this  reason  is  beneficial;  there  is  nothing  unsuitable 
about  it.    This  is  because  thousands  of  people  have  taken  refuge  of 
the  great sant who  has  chosen  to  take  this  path.    So,  how  can  they 
possibly not be slightly lectured? 
 
34.7 
“However, anger will not arise if a person avoids the very cause of 
that  anger.    Obviously,  anger  will  not  arise,  if  a  person  is  travelling 
alone in the jungle; but how can a great sant do that?  After all, he has 
understood  from  the shãstras the  great  rewards  involved  in  guiding 
countless people towards Bhagvãn by talks, in order that they attain 
kalyãn.      Similarly,   he   has   also   understood   the   importance   of 
observing Bhagvãn’s ãgnã.    Therefore,  even  though  he  may  express 
anger, he still does not abandon his decision to lead people to kalyãn. 
 
34.8
 A  person  who  has  developed  attachment  with  a  great sant,  has 
understood  that  his  personal  interest  of  attaining kalyãn can  be 
fulfilled  by  the sant.    Also,  he  believes, ‘I can only attain kalyãn 
through this sant’.  Then,  even  though  he  may  have  the svabhãv of 
krodh, he will never express that krodh on that great sant.  In fact, he 
will surely  abandon  his svabhãv.   So, krodh can  also  be eradicated in 
this way. 
 
34.9 
“On the other hand, a person who becomes angry on a sant over  the 
exchange  of  some  worthless  objects  has  simply  not  understood  the 
greatness of the sant, or the true path of a sant.  If he had understood 
it,  then  he  would  not  become  angry  over  such  worthless  objects.  
Even  if  such  a  person  is  intelligent  and  understanding,  if  he  does 
become  angry  on  a sant for  worthless  objects,  then  his  intellect 

GADHADÃ III 
- 769 - 
should be considered to be like that of a king’s minister – skilled only 
in worldly affairs.  He does not possess the intellect of sant.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 34 || 268 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 35 
Forcefully Altering Svabhãv 
Bhagvãn Is Insulted When His Bhakta Is Insulted 
 
35.1 
In  the Samvat year  1885,  on Chaitra sud 9  [12
th
 April  1829],  Swãmi 
Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   in   the mandir of Shree 
Gopinãthji in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed 
entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of sãdhus,  as  well  as haribhaktas 
from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
35.2 
Then,  Shuk Muni  asked,  “Mahãrãj,  how  can  we  recognise  that  a 
person has such a firm refuge of Bhagvãn and His bhaktas that it will 
not  falter  in  any  way – regardless  of  the  extent  of  suffering  he  may 
have  to  face;  regardless of  any  physical  happiness  or  distress;  and 
regardless  of  whether  he  faces  honour  or  insult,  or  even  unpleasant 
circumstances?    Please  also  describe  what  type  of  thoughts  such  a 
person has in mind, as well as how he behaves physically?” 
 
35.3 
Then,  Shreeji Mahãrãj said in reply, “If a bhakta realises  that  only 
Bhagvãn is great, but he does not believe anything else to be greater 
than Bhagvãn; and if he also believes that everything except Bhagvãn 
is  worthless;  and  if  he  does  not  become  disturbed  or  annoyed  when 
Bhagvãn or His sant attempts to forcefully alter his svabhãv or when 
they  do  not  allow  him  to  behave  according  to  his svabhãv;  and  if  he 
can  abandon  his svabhãv,  no  matter  how  embedded  it  may  be,  and 
follow  the ãgnã of Bhagvãn and  His sant in  a simple way – then  that 
bhakta’s acceptance   of   the   refuge   of Bhagvãn will   not   falter, 
regardless of how difficult the circumstances may be.” 

GADHADÃ III 
- 770 - 
35.4 
Shuk Muni then queried, “Such a person must become disturbed, 
because when someone’s svabhãv is  forcefully  altered,  he  naturally 
becomes   disturbed.      So,   are   there   differences   in   the   types   of 
disturbances that are experienced or not?” 
 
35.5 
Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “If a person is disturbed when his nature 
is forcefully altered, and if he then finds avgun within himself rather 
than with Bhagvãn or His sant, then he is good.  However, instead of 
finding  faults  with  himself,  if  a  person  perceives avgun in Bhagvãn 
and  His sant,  then his  future is uncertain,  and  there  is  no stability in 
his refuge of Bhagvãn.” 
 
35.6 
Again,  Shuk  Muni  asked,  “If Bhagvãn or   His sant have   never 
attempted to twist a person’s nature, how can he realise in his own 
mind, ‘If they do attempt to do so at some time in the future, I will 
become disturbed’.    After  all,  how  can  a  person  be  sure  of  something 
that he has not experienced?” 
 
35.7 
Hearing this, Shreeji Mahãrãj explained, “A person should think about 
the  thoughts  that  occur  in  his  mind.    For  example, ‘In the mind, 
besides the thoughts of Bhagvãn, there are also thoughts related to the 
panch-vishays.    Of  these,  for  which  objects  do  I  have  powerful  desires 
and for which do I have strong cravings?’  If  a  person  thinks  in  this 
way,  he  can  realise  himself  as  he  truly  is;  otherwise,  he  cannot.  
During  the  thinking  of  those  thoughts,  he  should  also  realise, ‘I have 
very  strong  desires  for  this  object,  and  I  am  striving  to  attain  it.  
However,  when  a  sant  attempts  to  have  me  abandon  it,  I  will  become 
disturbed’.    In  this  way,  he  becomes  clear  about  his  own  self.    If  his 
svabhãv is stubborn, and Bhagvãn or His sant do not attempt to alter 
it,  then  he  will  survive  in satsang.    However,  if  they  do  attempt  to 
alter  it,  then  he  will  definitely  fall.    Ultimately,  he  will  become 
extremely disturbed and will fall from satsang.” 
 
35.8 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “The shãstras claim that to insult a sant is 
the greatest of all sins.  What is the reason for this?  Well, it is because 
Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn Himself  resides  in  the  heart  of  that sant.  

GADHADÃ III 
- 771 - 
Therefore,  when  a  person  insults  a sant,  he  insults Bhagvãn as  well.  
After  all,  when  a  person  insults  a sant, Bhagvãn, who  resides  within 
his  heart,  is  hurt.    In  such  a  case,  the  sin  of  insulting Bhagvãn is  an 
even  greater  sin.    Therefore,  it  is  said  that  to  insult  the sant is  the 
greatest of all sins. 
 
35.9 
“Having said that though, Kans, Shishupãl, Putnã, and other demons 
insulted Bhagvãn, yet Bhagvãn still granted them kalyãn like that of a 
bhakta.    This  is  because  even  though  it  was  out  of  hatred,  those 
demons  did  think  about Bhagvãn.  So, Bhagvãn felt, ‘Those demons 
thought  of  me,  and  therefore  associated  with  me,  even  though  it  was 
out of hatred.  So, I should grant them kalyãn’.  These cases should be 
taken  as  examples  of Bhagvãn’s compassion.    A  person  should  also 
realise, ‘If Bhagvãn granted  them  kalyãn  even  though  they  sought  the 
refuge  of  Bhagvãn  through  hatred,  why  would  Bhagvãn  not  grant 
kalyãn  to  a  bhakta  who  seeks  His  refuge  by  offering  bhakti  and  who 
pleases Him by that bhakti?  Of course, He will’. 
 
35.10 
“The intention of those who  have  written  the shãstras is  to  inspire 
people  towards  the bhakti of Bhagvãn by  showing Bhagvãn’s great 
compassion;   their   intention   was   not   to   allow   people   to   behave 
against Bhagvãn’s wishes  like  the  demons.    Therefore,  a  person  who 
spites Bhagvãn by  keeping  hatred  towards  Him  and  who  behaves 
against  His  wishes  should  definitely  be  considered  to  be  a  demon – 
because that is the way of demons.  However, a person should behave 
only  in  a  way  that  will  please Bhagvãn;  he  should  engage  in bhakti 
and  please  Him  and  His bhaktas.    That  is  the  way  of  the bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn.” 
 
35.11 
Shuk Muni then asked further, “Mahãrãj, what are the characteristics 
of  a sant who  is  such  that  by  insulting  him, Bhagvãn residing  within 
his heart is also insulted, and by performing his sevã, Bhagvãn’s sevã 
is also performed?” 
 
35.12 
Shreeji   Mahãrãj   thought   for   a   while   and   then   answered   out   of 
compassion:  “First of all, the most important characteristic is that he 

GADHADÃ III 
- 772 - 
never  believes Bhagvãn to  be nirãkãr.    He  understands Bhagvãn to 
eternally sãkãr.    No  matter  how  many  of  the  Purãns,  Upanishads, 
Veds, or other shãstras he may hear – if ever he comes across the idea 
of Bhagvãn being nirãkãr, he thinks, ‘Either I have not understood the 
true  meaning  of  the  shãstras,  or  there  may  be  other  purpose  behind 
such words; but Bhagvãn is always sãkãr’.    If  he does  not understand 
Bhagvãn be sãkãr, then his upãsanã cannot be considered to be firm.  
Also, if Bhagvãn is nirãkãr, then He could not be called the all-doer – 
just  as ãkãsh cannot  be  called  the  doer;  and  nor  could  He  be  said  to 
reside  in  one  location.    Therefore, Bhagvãn is eternally sãkãr.    In 
addition,  He  is  the  creator,  sustainer,  and  destroyer  of  countless 
brahmãnds; He is forever present in His Akshardhãm; He is the lord of 
all; and He is pratyaksha here before your eyes.  The sant mentioned 
above always has this understanding; but this understanding of his is 
never shaken in any way or under any circumstances. 
 
35.13 
“Secondly,  he  engages  himself  in  the ekãntik bhakti of Bhagvãn.  
Moreover,  when  he  sees  someone  else  engaged  in kathãs,  singing 
kirtans,   and   chanting   the   holy   name   of Bhagvãn, he   becomes 
extremely pleased in his mind. 
 
35.14 
“Thirdly, when he stays amongst bhaktas,  he  does  not  allow  any  of 
his svabhãvs to interfere.  In fact, he will abandon his svabhãvs, but he 
will  not  leave  the  company  of  the bhaktas of Bhagvãn.  If  a sant 
happens  to  criticise  his svabhãvs,  he  does  not  have  hatred  towards 
the sant.  Instead, he finds faults with his own svabhãvs, but he never 
becomes  upset  or  even  thinks  of  departing  from  the  company  of  the 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn.  In  this  way,  he  remains  within  the  company  of 
bhaktas. 
 
35.15 
“Fourthly, when he comes across any precious item, such as an 
expensive  piece  of  clothing,  some  delicious  food,  or  clean  water, ‘It 
would be nice to give this to a bhakta of Bhagvãn’.    He  would  give 
away the items to him and be happy. 

GADHADÃ III 
- 773 - 
35.16 
“Fifth, the bhaktas in whose company he is staying do not feel, ‘He has 
beeen  staying  with  us  for so  many  years,  yet  we  have  not  been  able  to 
truly  understand  him;  and  who  knows  what  he  is  really  like?    It  is 
difficult to judge him’.  He  would  not  be  like  that.    Instead,  he  would 
be such that everyone would know him outwardly and inwardly, and 
they  would  feel, ‘He is definitely like this’.    He  would  be  of  such  an 
honest nature. 
 
35.17 
“Sixth, even if he is of a quiet nature, he would not like the company 
of kusangis;  and  if  he  does  happen  to  come  across  them,  he  would 
become angry.  In this way, he has a natural dislike for the company 
of those who are vimukhs.   
 
35.18 
“Therefore, it should be known that Bhagvãn Himself  resides  in  the 
heart of a sant who possesses these six qualities.  By insulting such a 
sant,  a  person  commits  a  sin  equivalent  to  insulting Bhagvãn;  and  if 
he  performs sevã of  such  a sant,  he  earns  rewards  equivalent  to 
performing sevã of Bhagvãn.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 35 || 269 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 36 
The Most Extraordinary Spiritual Activity For Kalyãn 
The Company Of A Shushka-Vedãnti 
 
36.1 
In  the Samvat year  1885,  on Vaishãkh sud 1  [4
th
 May  1829],  Swãmi 
Shree Sahajãnandji Mahãrãj rode on horseback from Dãdã Khãchar’s 
darbãr in Gadhadã and arrived at Lakshmi-Vãdi.  He sat on a platform 
within  the  grounds.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A 
sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various  places  had 
gathered before Him. 
 
36.2 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj asked all the paramhans and bhaktas, “What is 
the  most  extraordinary  spiritual  activity  for  the kalyãn of  the jeev, 
which  will  surely  guarantee kalyãn and  prevent  all  other  obstacles 

GADHADÃ III 
- 774 - 
from  hindering  that kalyãn?    Also,  what  is  the  great  obstacle  in  that 
activity for kalyãn, on account of which a person would certainly fall 
from the path of kalyãn?  Please answer both of these questions.” 
 
36.3 
Everyone   answered   according   to   their   understanding,   but   the 
question was not answered satisfactorily. 
 
36.4 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj said in reply, “The most extraordinary spiritual 
activity is to understand Purushottam Bhagvãn, who is seated amidst 
the    mass    of    light    of Brahm,    as    eternally    having    a svarup.  
Furthermore,  after  understanding  that  all avatãrs originate  from 
Him,  a  person  should  accept  the  refuge  of  the pratyaksha svarup of 
Bhagvãn by  any  means  possible.    He  should  also  offer bhakti to  that 
Bhagvãn while  observing dharma,  as  well  as  associate  with  a sant 
possessing  such bhakti.    That  is  the  most  extraordinary  spiritual 
activity for kalyãn.  A person encounters no obstacles along that path. 
 
36.5 
“A major obstacle in practising that spiritual activity is keeping the 
company  of shushka-vedãntis.    Which  obstacles  arise  when  a  person 
keeps their company?  Initially, he develops affection for them.  That 
affection develops  due  to  the  kindness  of  the vedãntis.    For  example, 
if a person has saved someone’s life by giving him some food during a 
famine,  then  that  person  would  naturally  develop  affection  for  him.  
In this way, a person develops affection for a person who has helped 
him.    Also,  those shushka-vedãntis would  point  out  advantages,  such 
as, ‘The ãtmã does not undergo births and deaths, and it is formless.  In 
fact,  regardless  of  the  number  of  sins  a  person  may  commit,  the  ãtmã 
remains immune to those flaws’.  Pointing  out  such  advantages,  they 
criticise the svarup of Bhagvãn.  That is a major obstacle since it leads 
to  the  rejection  of Bhagvãn’s svarup.    Therefore,  a  person  should 
never  keep  the  company  of shushka-vedãntis – they  are  absolutely 
ignorant.    In  fact,  there  is  no  greater  obstacle  on  the  path  of bhakti 
than this.” 
 
36.6 
Then, Shreeji Mahãrãj returned to Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr.  There, He 
sat  on  a  large  decorated  bedstead  on  the  veranda  outside  the  east-

GADHADÃ III 
- 775 - 
facing rooms and said, “I have heard all the shãstras and have formed 
a principle.  I have also travelled throughout this land and seen many 
yogis.”  Shreeji Mahãrãj then narrated the stories of Gopãldãsji and 
other sãdhus.  He then continued by saying, “I believe that it is 
impossible  to  see  the ãtmã and brahm without  the upãsanã and 
dhyãn of Bhagvãn’s murti.    Only  through upãsanã can  the ãtmã and 
brahm be seen; without it, they cannot be seen.  In fact, wishing to see 
the ãtmã and brahm without upãsanã is  like  attempting  to  lick  the 
sky  with  the  tongue;  even  if  a  person  tries  for  a  hundred  years,  he 
will never be able to taste it as sour or salty.  Similarly, the ãtmã and 
brahm simply  cannot  be  seen  without  the upãsanã of  the murti of 
Bhagvãn – regardless   of   the   efforts   a   person   may   resort   to.  
Furthermore,  the  fact  that  the shãstras mention  the  possibility  of 
ãtmã-nishthã through nirbij Sãnkhya  and  Yog  is  irrelevant – I  have 
not  seen  anyone  do  so,  nor  is  the  claim  in  agreement  with  my 
experience.  Therefore, the claim is false.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 36 || 270 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 37 
The Happiness Of Bhagvãn Is Never Forgotten 
 
37.1 
In  the Samvat year  1885,  on Vaishãkh sud 3  [6
th
 May  1829],  Swãmi 
Shree  Sahajãnandji  Mahãrãj  was  sitting  on  a  square  cushion  on  the 
veranda outside the north-facing rooms of Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in 
Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed  entirely  in  white  clothes.    A sabhã of 
paramhans, as well as haribhaktas from various places, had gathered 
before Him. 
 
37.2 
Then,  addressing  all  the sãdhus and bhaktas,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said, 
“Once a person has thoroughly attained the gnãn of Bhagvãn, then 
even if the factors of desh, kãl, kriyã, and sang become unpleasant for 
him,  his gnãn does  not  diminish  in  the  least.    For  example,  take  the 
analogy  of  a  great  king  or  a  millionaire.    If  he  happens  to  lose  his 

GADHADÃ III 
- 776 - 
status due to his prãrabdha and becomes poor, and because of that if 
he has only cheap food to eat, such as low-quality grains, or spinach, 
or moss, or berries, or boiled pipal fruit, then he would certainly eat 
it;  but  he  would  also  recall  the  expensive  foods  that  he  formerly 
obtained and ate.  In his mind he would think, ‘I used to eat all those 
delicious foods in the past, whereas now I eat such common food’.    In 
this  way, whenever  he  eats,  he  would  recall  this.    However,  if  a 
person has been eating such common food from the beginning, and if 
he  becomes  even  poorer,  then  he  continues  to  eat  the  same  type  of 
food as before.  So, what does he have to recall?  Nothing. 
 
37.3 
“So, once a person has thoroughly known the bliss of Bhagvãn and 
the bliss of worshipping Bhagvãn in his own mind, then even if he can 
no longer remain within satsang and has to leave, he will experience 
happiness     and     misery     according     to     his prãrabdha while 
remembering  that  bliss;  he  will  not  forget  it.    But,  what  is  there  to 
recall for someone who has not known that bliss of Bhagvãn and who 
has not experienced it?  Nothing.  Such a person is like an animal.” 
 
37.4 
Continuing, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “Now,  I  shall  narrate  to  you  the 
gnãn of  the murti of Bhagvãn.  No dev,  human  or  anything  created 
from Prakruti,  possesses  a murti like Bhagvãn.  In  addition, Kãl 
devours  everything  except Bhagvãn; Kãl’s powers  are  incapable  of 
affecting Bhagvãn.  This is what Bhagvãn is like.  In fact, only Bhagvãn 
is like Bhagvãn; no one else can even compare to Him.  Also, a bhakta 
in  the dhãm of Bhagvãn who  has  attained  characteristics  similar  to 
Bhagvãn also   possesses   a svarup similar   to   that   of Bhagvãn.  
Nevertheless,    that bhakta is    still    a mukta,    and Bhagvãn is 
Purushottam.   Bhagvãn is  supreme  amongst  everyone  and  is  worthy 
to be worshipped by everyone.  He is also their master.  However, no 
one  can  understand  the  greatness  of  that Bhagvãn.  He  has  a divya 
murti, is nirgun, and is worthy of performing dhyãn upon.  In fact, that 
murti of Bhagvãn is  such  that  a  person  who  performs dhyãn upon 
Him becomes nirgun himself. 

GADHADÃ III 
- 777 - 
37.5 
“Moreover, while staying in one place, in His dhãm, Bhagvãn resides 
by  way  of  His anvay form  as  the antaryãmi and  the  giver  of  the 
deserved  rewards  of karmas to  all  the jeevs  in  countless brahmãnds.  
He  is  the  very  life  of  all jeevs;  and  without  Him,  those jeevs  are  not 
capable of doing anything or indulging in anything. 
 
37.6 
“In addition, that Bhagvãn is the master of all yogic powers.  Just as a 
person who has attained yogic powers can obtain any object with his 
own hands, even in Brahm-Lok, while sitting here, similarly, Bhagvãn 
performs all activities while staying in one place only using His yogic 
powers.    Also,  for  example,  the  fire  that  is  latent  within  wood  and 
stone  is  different  from  the  wood  and  stone  themselves.    Similarly, 
Bhagvãn dwells  within  all jeevs,  but  His svarup is  different  from  the 
svarup of the jeevs. 
 
37.7 
“That Bhagvãn Himself,  possessing  countless divya powers,  becomes 
like  a  human  for  the  purpose  of  granting kalyãn to  the jeevs.    If  a 
person develops the gnãn of that svarup of Bhagvãn in this way, then 
if he has offered bhakti to that Bhagvãn and has fully experienced the 
bliss of that gnãn and bhakti as it really is at least once in his jeev, he 
will  never  forget  it.    In  fact,  regardless  of  whatever  happiness  or 
distress comes his way, he does not forget the experience of that bliss 
of Bhagvãn’s svarup,  just  as the  king  in  a  state  of  poverty  does  not 
forget the happiness of his past. 
 
37.8 
“I tell you this because currently all of you are present in satsang; but, 
due   to   unpleasant   circumstances   or   unpleasant prãrabdha,   if   a 
person  no  longer  remains  in satsang,  then  if  he  has  understood  this 
fact, his jeev can still attain kalyãn.  Also, if a person has such a belief, 
he will never feel, ‘I will not attain kalyãn’.  After all, to continuously 
remain  in satsang is indeed  extremely  difficult.    In  fact,  to  physically 
behave  as  described  is  also  rare.    However,  if  a  person  someday 
happens  to  leave satsang,  then  even  if  he  cannot  physically  behave 

GADHADÃ III 
- 778 - 
like  this  at  that  time,  his jeev will  still  benefit  greatly  if  he  has 
understood this fact.  That is why I have delivered this talk.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 37 || 271 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 38 
Avoiding The Six Desires 
 
38.1 
In the Samvat year 1885, on Vaishãkh sud 14 [17
th
 May 1829], Swãmi 
Shree   Sahajãnandji   Mahãrãj   was   sitting   in   the mandir of Shree 
Gopinãthji in Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in  Gadhadã.    He  was  dressed 
entirely   in   white   clothes.      A sabhã of paramhans,   as   well   as 
haribhaktas from various places, had gathered before Him. 
 
38.2 
Then,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said,  “Having  thought  about  the  Sãnkhya 
shãstras as  well  as  other shãstras,  I  have  formed  the  belief  that  all 
svarups that are the result of the entities evolved from Mãyã are false.  
This  is  because  all  of  those svarups will  be  destroyed  by Kãl.    On  the 
other  hand,  the svarup of Bhagvãn in Akshardhãm and  the svarup of 
the muktas – the pãrshads of Bhagvãn – are  all satya, divya,  and 
extremely  luminous.    Also,  the svarup of  that Bhagvãn and  those 
muktas is   two-armed   like   that   of   a   human   being,   and   it   is 
sachidãnand.    That Bhagvãn, residing  in Akshardhãm,  is  served  by 
those muktas with  various  types  of divya items,  and  He  is  always 
present there to bestow supreme bliss upon the muktas. 
 
38.3 
“It is that same supreme Purushottam Bhagvãn who  takes  birth  on 
this  earth  out  of  compassion – for  the  purpose  of  granting kalyãn to 
the jeevs.    He  is  presently  visible  before  everyone;  He  is  your ishta-
dev;   and   He   accepts   your sevã.      In   fact,   there   is   absolutely   no 
difference  between  the pratyaksha  svarup of Purushottam Bhagvãn 
visible before you and the svarup of Bhagvãn residing in Akshardhãm; 
both are one.  Also, this pratyaksha svarup of Purushottam Bhagvãn is 
the controller of all, including Akshar.  He is the lord (sarvopari) of all 

GADHADÃ III 
- 779 - 
the ishvars and the cause of all the avatãrs (avatãri).  Moreover, He is 
worthy  of  being  worshipped  by  all  of  you.    The  many  previous 
avatãrs of  this Bhagvãn are  worthy  of  being  bowed  down  to  and 
worthy of respect.” 
 
38.4 
Shreeji  Mahãrãj  then  explained,  “A  person  who  possesses  the 
following  six  characteristics  will  never  become  happy,  either  in  this 
life or even after death: greed for wealth and other things; desires to 
associate  with  women;  attachment  of  the  tongue  to  various  tastes; 
the  belief  that  a  person  is  the  body;  affection  for kusangis;  and 
attachment to relatives.  Therefore, a person who desires to be happy 
should  eradicate  these svabhãvs,  maintain nivrutti,  and  not  keep  the 
company of those equal himself.  A person should also attach his jeev 
to the bhaktas of Bhagvãn – the great sant – who does not identify his 
self with the body, who possesses vairãgya, and who feels that he has 
disobeyed a major ãgnã of Bhagvãn even if he has disobeyed a minor 
ãgnã.    A  person  should  act  according  to  his ãgnã by  thought,  word, 
and deed.  Also, he should certainly avoid the vishays, and in no way 
should  he  allow  them  to  come  near  by  abandoning  his niyams.    If  a 
person does begin to associate with the vishays, he will certainly fall.  
This should be accepted as a universal principle.” 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 38 || 272 || 
 
 
Gadhadã III – 39 
Vishalya-Karani Herbal Medicine 
There Is Only One Bhagvãn 
 
39.1 
In  the Samvat year  1886,  on Ashãdh vad 10  [25
th
 July  1829],  Shreeji 
Mahãrãj  was sitting  on  the  veranda  outside  the  east-facing  rooms  of 
Dãdã Khãchar’s darbãr in Gadhadã.  He was dressed entirely in white 
clothes.    A sabhã of paramhans,  as  well  as haribhaktas from  various 
places, had gathered before Him. 

GADHADÃ III 
- 780 - 
39.2 
Addressing  all  the paramhans and satsangis,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  said, 
“What is Bhagvãn’s mãyã?    Well, mãyã is nothing but the sense of ‘I-
ness’ towards the body and ‘my-ness’ towards anything related to the 
body.  These should be eradicated.  Anyone who eradicates mãyã can 
be said to have gone beyond mãyã.  In fact, it is the principle of all the 
shãstras that a  person  should  eradicate mãyã and  develop  love  for 
Bhagvãn.  This  principle  must  be  understood – either  today  or  at 
some time in the future.  Great bhaktas, such as Hanumãn, Nãrad, and 
Prahlãd, have  also  asked from Bhagvãn, ‘Protect us from mãyã in the 
form of ‘I-ness’ and ‘my-ness’, and may we develop love for you.  May we 
also  have  the  company  of  a  sant  who  has  gone  beyond  mãyã  and  has 
love for you; and may we develop affection and a sense of ‘my-ness’ 
towards him as well’.    Therefore,  we  too should  do the  same  and ask 
for  the  same,  as  well  as  do shravan, manan,  and nididhyãs on  this 
principle.” 
 
39.3 
Then continuing, Shreeji Mahãrãj said, “A bhakta of Bhagvãn requires 
the   strength   of   two   things:    ãtmã-nishthã and   the   greatness   of 
Bhagvãn.  What  is ãtmã-nishthã?    It  is  to  realise  the ãtmã as  being 
distinct  from  the  body.    If  while  staying  among  the sãdhus there 
happens to be a quarrel from some reason, or if the feelings of ‘I-ness’ 
and ‘my-ness’, or vicious natures such as mãn, krodh, svãd, lobh, kãm, 
matsar,  and irshyã,  prevail,  then  a  person  who  does  not  regard 
himself  as  the ãtmã perceives avgun in  the sãdhus.    This  would  be 
extremely  harmful  for  him.    That  is  why  a  person  should  realise  his 
true self as being the ãtmã, distinct from the body. 
 
39.4 
“That ãtmã is neither a brãhman, nor a kshatriya, nor a kanbi.  It is no 
one’s son and no one’s father.  It belongs to no varna.  It is radiant like 
the sun and fire; but it is also full of chaitanya.  The flames of fire and 
the  rays  of  the  sun  are jad because  they  do  not  move  when  touched 
by  a  finger.    However,  when  an  ant  is  touched  by  a  finger,  it  moves 
and turns back.  This implies that the ãtmã is full of consciousness.  It 
is said to be similar to the sun or to fire, but that is merely because its 
form is similar in radiance. 

GADHADÃ III 
- 781 - 
39.5 
“The ãtmã has  passed  through countless  life  forms.    In  fact, it is said 
that  a  person  has  drank  as  much  milk  from  his  mothers  as  there  is 
water in the ocean.  In those lives, the ãtmã has experienced death in 
countless ways, yet it has not perished.  It has remained as it is.  So, if 
it  did  not  perish  in  that state  of  ignorance  when  it  regarded  itself  as 
the  body,  how  shall  it  perish  now  that  we  have its gnãn?    Therefore, 
we should realise that ãtmã as our true self. 
 
39.6 
“Furthermore, how should the greatness of Bhagvãn be understood?  
Well, Bhagvãn is   the   lord   of   the   lords   of   countless brahmãnds.  
However,  the brahmãnds of  which  He  is  the  lord  are  insignificant 
compared to Him.  Therefore, it is said: 
 
dyupataya eva ten a yayur-antam anantatayã 
tvamapi yad-antarãnda-nichayã nanu sãvaranãhã 
Even the masters of the higher loks cannot understand your greatness, 
because it is endless.  Neither can you yourself understand your own greatness.  
In your each and every hair, countless brahmãnds and their barriers (jad 
prakruti) fly simultaneously at immense speed – like specks of dust flying in 
the air.  Even the Shrutis, ultimately perish in you, and fail to praise your glory. 
 
39.7 
“Within each brahmãnd there are Brahmã, Vishnu, and Shiv, as well as 
the pruthvi with  its  seven dvips,  seven  oceans,  Meru,  and  Lokã-Lok, 
and other mountains.  The brahmãnds also contain the fourteen loks, 
the  eight  barriers,  and  many  other  things.   Bhagvãn is  the  lord  of 
countless  such brahmãnds.    For  example,  person  can  realise  the 
reputation  of  an  emperor  of  the  world,  even  though  his  villages  can 
be counted.  But, the reputation of Bhagvãn is much greater because 
even those countless brahmãnds are insignificant to Him.  So then, of 
what   significance   can   the   beings   of   those brahmãnds be   before 
Bhagvãn’s?      They   are   of   no   significance   at   all;   they   are   utterly 
insignificant. 
 
39.8 
“Furthermore, in those brahmãnds,  what  are  the  pleasures  of  the 
panch-vishays that Bhagvãn has  given  to  the jeevs  like?    Well,  those 

GADHADÃ III 
- 782 - 
pleasures  seem  extremely  rare;  so  much  so,  that  many  have  given 
their heads for them.  However, the bliss of Bhagvãn’s own murti and 
of  His dhãm are  indeed  outstanding.    The  pleasures  of  the  worldly 
vishays are  dependent  on  other  factors  and  must  be  experienced 
distinctly.    In  comparison, Bhagvãn is  the  reservoir  of  all  forms  of 
bliss.    Moreover,  the  bliss  of Bhagvãn is  imperishable  and  extremely 
alokik.    For  this,  consider  the  following  analogy:    An  extremely 
wealthy  man  enjoys  a  great  variety  of  food  at home.    Then,  after 
finishing the meal, he throws a leftover piece of rotlo to a dog.  In this 
case, the leftover piece of rotlo can be considered utterly inferior, and 
the  various  delicious  foods  that  the  wealthy  man  enjoys  can  be 
considered to be full of pleasure.  In the same way, Bhagvãn has given 
the  countless jeevs  of  the brahmãnds the  pleasures  of  the panch-
vishays; but they are inferior like the piece of rotlo thrown to the dog, 
whereas the bliss of Bhagvãn Himself is far greater. 
 
39.9 
“Even so, Bhagvãn grants a great deal of happiness to the jeev during 
the  state  of sushupti.    During sushupti,  a  person  is  relieved  of  even 
severe pain, and instead, he experiences profound peace. 
 
39.10 
“Even the great bhaktas such  as Brahmã, Shiv, Lakshmiji, Rãdhãji, 
Nãrad, Shukji, the Sanakãdik, and the nine Yogeshvars apply the dust 
of Bhagvãn’s holy feet upon their heads.  They put aside all their self-
importance and constantly offer bhakti to Him. 
 
39.11 
“Moreover, just look at the diverse creation created by Bhagvãn!  
What  creativity  He  has  used!    Just  see,  a  human  is  born  of  a  human, 
and an animal from an animal; a tree from a tree, and an ant from an 
ant.    Also,  no  matter  how  intelligent  someone  may  be,  no  one  is 
capable of replacing a destroyed part of someone’s body exactly as it 
was  before.   Bhagvãn possesses  innumerable  such  skills.    Therefore, 
by realising the greatness of Bhagvãn and realising Him to be blissful, 
a  person  develops vairãgya for  all  things,  and  develops  love  for 
Bhagvãn alone. 

GADHADÃ III 
- 783 - 
39.12 
“If  a  person   attains   the gnãn of   his jeevãtmã and   the gnãn of 
Bhagvãn’s greatness   as   mentioned   earlier,   then   even   if   he   has 
somehow  become  attached  to  any  sort  of  pleasures  of  the panch-
vishays,  he  would  not  remain  bound  by  them,  but  would    break  that 
bondage  and withdraw  from  them.  Then,  how  can  a  person  who 
abandons   the   pleasures   of   the panch-vishays become   attached?  
Therefore,  having  listened  to  these  two  types  of gnãn,  a  person 
should  apply  them  within  his  mind  with  great  enthusiasm.    For 
example,  a  brave  and fierce  man  would  be  extremely  angered  if  an 
enemy killed his father.  If the enemy harassed him further by killing 
his  son  and  brother,  kidnapping  his  wife,  passing on  his mother  to  a 
Muslim, as well as stealing all his belongings, the man would become 
increasingly  angered  as  he  is  harassed  more  and  more.    At  all  times 
then – while awake as well as in his dreams – he would be obsessed 
by  only  this.    In  the  same  way,  only  when  a  person  is  constantly 
obsessed  by  these  two  topics  can  that gnãn be  realised.    Then,  that 
gnãn would  assist  him  against  any  sort  of  difficulty  that  may  occur.  
For  example,  when Hanumãnji brought  the vishalya-karani herbal 
medicine for Rãmchandraji and gave it to Him to drink, all the arrows 
from Rãmchandraji’s body  fell  out  by  themselves.    Similarly,  all  the 
‘arrows’ in the form of the desires of the indriyas to  indulge  in  the 
vishays are removed when these two points have been embedded in a 
person’s  mind.    The vruttis of   his indriyas withdraw   from   the 
pleasures of the vishays and become rooted only in Bhagvãn.  Only he 
is a satsangi, because only he who associates with his own satya ãtmã 
and satya Bhagvãn can be called a satsangi. 
 
39.13 
“If a religious person were to hear the talks of these two points, they 
would stir his heart and pervade every pore of his body.  Conversely, 
if  a  demonic  person  were  to  hear  them,  they  would  not  touch  his 
heart at all; instead, they would exit from his ears, just as khir would 
not remain in a dog’s stomach because the dog would vomit it out.  In 
actual  fact,  nothing  can  be  said  to  be  as  delicious  as khir,  yet  it  does 
not remain in a dog’s stomach, let alone pervade its body.  On the 
other hand, if a man were to eat khir, it would indeed pervade every 

GADHADÃ III 
- 784 - 
pore  of  his  body,  and  it  would  be  extremely  enjoyable.    Likewise, 
these  talks  do  not  enter  into  the  hearts  of  dog-like,  demonic  people; 
these  talks  enter  and  pervade  totally  only  in  the  hearts  of  religious 
people.” 
 
39.14 
Shreeji Mahãrãj then added, “Only Bhagvãn is  like Bhagvãn.  Many 
have  attained  qualities  similar  to  His  by  worshipping  Him,  yet  they 
certainly  do  not  become  like Bhagvãn.  If  they  did  become  like 
Bhagvãn, this would suggest the existence of several Bhagvãns.  As a 
result,  the  control  of  the  world  would  not  remain  organised.    One 
Bhagvãn would  say, ‘I will create the world’,  while  another Bhagvãn 
would  say, ‘I will destroy the world’.    One Bhagvãn would  say, ‘I will 
make it rain’,  while  another  would  say, ‘I will not’.    One Bhagvãn 
would  say, ‘I will instil human instincts in animals’,  while  another 
would  say, ‘I will instil animal instincts in humans’.    A  stable  state 
would  not  be  possible  in  this  situation.    But,  see  how  organised 
everything  functions  in  the  world!    There  is  not  even  the  slightest 
irregularity.  Therefore, the ruler of all activities and the lord of all is 
one Bhagvãn.  Not only that, it seems that no one can ever challenge 
Him.    Therefore, Bhagvãn is  definitely  one,  and  no  one  can  become 
like Him. 
 
39.15 
“All these facts that I have revealed may be simple, but they include 
everything.   However, only  the  wise can  grasp  their  essence,  but  not 
others.        Whoever    understands    these    facts    and    thoroughly 
strengthens them has accomplished everything; he has nothing more 
to  achieve.    Having  listened  to  these  talks  delivered  by  me,  a  person 
should  keep  the  company  of  those bhaktas of Bhagvãn who  have 
thoroughly   absorbed   them.      This   will   lead   to   the   day-by-day 
strengthening of those talks.” 
 
39.16 
In conclusion, Shreeji Mahãrãj revealed, “I deliver these talks to you 
not from any imagination of my mind, nor to display any sort of skill.  
I  have  experienced  all  that  I  have  spoken  about.    In  fact,  I  speak  in 

GADHADÃ III 
- 785 - 
accordance to what I practise.  Outwardly, I may have a great deal of 
contact with women, wealth, and the panch-vishays.  In fact, wherever 
I  go – Surat,  Amdãvãd,  Vadodarã,  Vadtãl – thousands  of  people 
gather;   they  obey   me,  honour   me,   and   welcome  me   with   great 
festivity;  and  I  stay  in  luxurious  places  and  receive  rich  clothes  and 
vehicles.    Despites  all  this,  whenever  I  look  towards  my ãtmã and 
towards  the  greatness  of Bhagvãn, it  all  seems  absolutely  worthless.  
I cannot become attached to any of it, and I become unaware of it all, 
just as a person is unaware of his past lives.  The reason I can behave 
in   such   way   is   that   I   have   thoroughly   realised   the   two   topics 
mentioned before.  In fact, whoever realises them would also behave 
accordingly  if  ever  he  were  somehow  put  in  similar  circumstances.  
Therefore, these two topics should be understood by all means.” 
 
39.17 
In  this  way,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj,  out  of  great  compassion,  addressed 
others  on  the  basis  of  His  own  behaviour.    However,  He  is Shree 
Purushottam Nãrãyan. 
 
|| End of Vachanãmrut Gadhadã || 39 || 273 || 
 
 
|| End of Shree Gadhadã Antya Prakaran || 
 

BHUGOL KHAGOL 
- 786 - 
|| SHREE SWÃMINÃRAYAN VIJAYTETRÃM || 
 
VACHANÃMRUT 
Bhugol Khagol 
 
Geography And Astronomy 
 
1 
From Bhãdarvã sud 1  to Bhãdarvã  sud 11, Samvat 1863  [11  to  21 
November 1806], Shreeji Mahãrãj sat under the harmo tree in Bhakti-
Bãg, in Gadhadã, and dictated a letter to Shuk Muni addressed to His 
bhaktas.    The  letter  included  a  description  of pruthvi,  the dvips and 
the khands; the time span of the yugs; and a narration of the various 
types  of  destruction  in  reference  to  the  rarity  of  attaining  a  human 
birth   in Bharat-Khand.      It   incorporated   the   message   of   being 
determined  to  attain kalyãn rather  than  engaging  too  deeply  in 
worldly  activities.    A  similar  letter  is  also  noted  in  the  Shree  Hari 
Leelãmrut. 
 
2 
“The Shreemad Bhãgvat and other sacred shãstras state  that  it  is 
extremely rare to receive a human birth in Bharat-Khand, and that it 
can  be  equalled  to  receiving  a chintãmani.    In  fact,  even Indra and 
other devs long  for  a  human  birth.    The vishays,  the  riches,  and 
luxuries,  as  well  as  the  lifespan  of  the devs greatly  exceed  that  of 
humans, yet they have no means of attaining moksh in their own loks.  
Only after receiving a human birth in Bharat-Khand can a jeev attain 
moksh.   In  no  other  place  and  with  no other  body  is kalyãn possible.  
For  this  reason,  attaining  a  human  birth  in Bharat-Khand is  better 
than being born in any of the other region of Mrutyu-Lok.  Therefore, 
there  is  no  place  in  the  fourteen loks that  can  compare  with Bharat-
Khand.   
 
3 
“Here are the names of those fourteen loks,  of  which  six  are  above 
Mrutyu-Lok:  Firstly, there is Bhuvar-Lok, where impure devs reside.  

BHUGOL KHAGOL 
- 787 - 
Second  is  Svarg-Lok,  where Indra and  other devs reside.    Third  is 
Mahar-Lok,  where  Aryam  and  other  ancestral devs reside.    Fourth  is 
Jan-Lok  and,  fifth  is  Tap-Lok.    Bhrugu  and  other rushis stay  in  these 
two loks.   Finally,  the  sixth  and  highest lok is  Satya-Lok,  where 
Brahmã resides.  These are the seven loks including Mrutyu-Lok. 
 
4 
“Below Mrutyulok there are a further seven loks.    In  Atal,  Vital,  and 
Sutal,  the  demons  reside.    Below  them  are  Talãtal,  Mahãtal,  and 
Rasãtal,   in   which   nocturnal   beings   reside.      Finally,   Pãtãl   is   the 
seventh lok,  where  serpents  reside.    These  seven loks are  below 
Mrutyu-Lok.  This makes fourteen loks in total, of which Mrutyu-Lok 
is the best. 
 
5 
“Mrutyu-Lok comprises of seven spherical dvips:   
 
“In the centre is Jambu-Dvip,  which  is  100,000 yojans in  size.    It  is 
surrounded  by  an  ocean  of  salt-water  that  is  also  100,000 yojans in 
size. 
 
“The second dvip is Plaksh-Dvip, which is 200,000 yojans in size.  It is 
surrounded  by  an  ocean  of ikshu (sugarcane  juice),  which  is  also 
200,000 yojans in size. 
 
“The third dvip is  Shãlmali-Dvip,  which  is  circular,  and  is  400,000 
yojans in size.  It is surrounded by an ocean of surã (alcohol), which is 
also 400,000 yojans in size.  
   
“The fourth dvip is Kush-Dvip,  which  is  also  circular,  and  is  800,000 
yojans wide.    It  is  surrounded  by  an  ocean  of ghrut (ghee),  which  is 
also 800,000 yojans in size.  
 
“The fifth dvip is Kraunch-Dvip, which is 1,600,000 yojans in size.  It is 
surrounded  by  an  ocean  of kshir (milk),  which  is  also  1,600,000 
yojans in size. 

BHUGOL KHAGOL 
- 788 - 
“The sixth dvip is  Shãk-Dvip,  which  is  3,200,000 yojans wide.    It  is 
surrounded  by  an  ocean  of dadhi-mandod (yoghurt),  which  is  also 
3,200,000 yojans in size. 
 
“Finally, the seventh dvip is  called  Pushkar-Dvip,  which  is  6,400,000 
yojans in  size.   It  is  surrounded  by  an  ocean  of  sweet sudhã (amrut), 
which is also 6,400,000 yojans in size.  
 
“These  are  the  seven dvips that  make  up  Mrutyu-Lok,  of  which 
Jambu-Dvip is the best. 
 
6 
“Jambu-Dvip itself  comprises  of  nine khands.    At  the  centre  is  the 
golden  Mount  Meru.    Surrounding  its  base  on  all  four  sides  is  the 
landmass called Ilãvart-Khand, where Sankarshan is worshipped, and 
Shivji is  the  main bhakta.    To  the  west  of  Meru  is  Ketumãl-Khand, 
which  is  also  called  Subhag.    There, Pradyumna is  worshipped,  and 
Lakshmiji is the main bhakta. 
 
“To the north of Meru, there are three khands:  Ramyak-Khand – 
where Matsya is  worshipped,  and  Sãvarni  Manu  is  the  main bhakta; 
north  of  that  is  Hiranyamay-Khand – where  Kurma is worshipped, 
and Aryamã is the main bhakta; and north of that still is Kuru-Khand- 
where Varãh is  worshipped,  and  Pruthvi  is  the  main bhakta.    This 
makes five khands. 
 
“To the east of Meru there is the khand called  Bhadrãshva-Khand – 
where Hayagriv is worshipped, and Bhadrashravã is the main bhakta.  
South  of Meru,  there  are a  further  three khands:    Harivarsh-Khand – 
where Nrusinh is worshipped, and Prahlãd is the main bhakta; south 
of   that   is   Kimpurush-Khand – where Rãm is   worshipped,   and 
Hanumãn is  the  main bhakta;  and  further  south  of  that  is Bharat-
Khand – where Nar-Nãrãyan is  worshipped,  and Nãradji is  the  main 
bhakta.   These are  the  nine khands of  Jambu-Dvip.    Of  these, Bharat-
Khand is  the  best  because  although  the  other  eight  have  a  greater 

BHUGOL KHAGOL 
- 789 - 
extent  of  worldly  pleasures  to  indulge  in,  a  person  cannot  attain 
kalyãn there – activities for kalyãn are only possible in Bharat-Khand.  
For this reason, there is no place in the fourteen loks equal to Bharat-
Khand. 
 
7 
“Within Bharat-Khand,  there  are  thirteen  regions  which  are anãrya 
(immoral).    They  are:    [1]  Bangãl,  [2]  Nepãl,  [3]  Bhut,  [4]  Kãmãkshi, 
[5]  Sindh,  [6]  Kãbul,  [7]  Lãhor,  [8]  Multãn,  [9]  Irãn,  [10]  Astambol, 
[11]  Arbastãn,  [12]  Svãl,  and  [13]  Pilpilãm.    These  thirteen  are 
impure.  It is very difficult for someone who has taken birth there to 
attain  the  association  of  a sadguru (the  granter  of moksh)  and  to 
understand the nature of moksh. 
 
8 
“Twelve-and-a-half   regions   in Bharat-Khand are   said   to   be ãrya 
(sacred).    These  are:    [1] Purva,  [2]  Vraj,  [3]  Mãlav,  [4]  Mãru,  [5] 
Panjãb,  [6]  Gujarãt,  [7]  Dakshin,  [8]  Malbãr,  [9]  Tilang,  [10]  Drãvid, 
[11]  Bãrmalãr,  [12]  Sorath,  and  half  of  Kutch.    These  twelve-and-a-
half  regions  are  superior.    There,  the sadguru –who  is  a  knower  of 
brahm – is always present.  Whoever receives a human birth in these 
regions is able to understand dharma, gnãn, vairãgya, and bhakti, and 
is  able  to  realise  the  path  to kalyãn.    How  does  he  come  to  realise 
this?    Well,  these  regions  are  called  the  best  because  of the  many 
avatãrs of Bhagvãn that  take  birth  there.    Therefore,  all  humans  of 
Bharat-Khand can attain kalyãn if they make an effort; if they do not 
make  an  effort,  they  will not  attain kalyãn.   Therefore, a  person  who 
is  wise  should  abandon  violence  and  other  such  vicious  natures, 
abandon evil influences, and seek the refuge of the sadguru, who is a 
knower of brahm, and perform his sevã. 
 
9 
“The sadguru, whose characteristics are noted in the sacred shãstras, 
is   someone   who   is   gifted   with   the   noble gun of dharma, gnãn, 
vairãgya, and bhakti.  After recognising that sadguru, a person should 
seek   his   refuge,   keep   his   body, indriyas, and antah-karans in 
accordance  with  his ãgnã,  and  engage  in  the  worship  of Bhagvãn.  

BHUGOL KHAGOL 
- 790 - 
This is the only means for attaining kalyãn.  Whoever has done this in 
the  past,  is  presently  doing  so,  or  will  do  so  in  the  future,  should  be 
regarded  as  a  person  who  has  best  made  use  of  his durlabh human 
body,  as  a  person  who has  true  understanding, and  as  a  person  who 
is  renowned.    Conversely,  a  person  who  does  not  understand  this, 
wastes  such  a durlabh human  birth  by  craving  the  insignificant 
pleasures   of   the   world,   and   by   having   faith   in   the   words   of   a 
hypocritical,  misleading guru – who  himself  is  prey  to  death.    Even 
though  this  person  may  be  called  understanding,  renowned,  wise 
among  the bhaktas,  and  highly  respected,  his  respect  and  fame  are 
merely like a dream.  Those who assume such fame and respect to be 
true  and  are  obsessed  by  them,  but  do  not  understand  the  path  to 
kalyãn,  are  called  fools  and  self-destroyers  by  a sant and  by  the 
sacred shãstras.    They  would  then  have  to  wait  a  great  deal  of  time 
before  receiving  another  human  birth  in  such  a  place  where kalyãn 
can be attained. 
 
10 
“The duration of this time is stated in the shãstras.  One lav of Brahmã 
is  equal  to  666  human  years  and  eight  months.    Sixty lav equal  one 
nimish,  which  is  equivalent  to  40,000  human  years.    Sixty nimish 
equals  one pal,  which  is  the  equivalent  of  2,400,000  human  years.  
Sixty pal equal one ghadi, which is 144,000,000 human years.  Thirty 
ghadi make    a    day    of Brahmã,    which    is    the    equivalent    of 
4,320,000,000 human years. 
 
11 
“The passing of four yugs is  called  a chokadi.   Satya-Yug lasts  for 
1,728,000  human  years; Tretã-Yug lasts  for  1,296,000  human  years; 
Dvãpar-Yug lasts  for  864,000  human  years;  and Kali-Yug lasts  for 
432,000  human  years.    This  means  one chokadi is  completed  in 
4,320,000  years;  and  the  one  thousand chokadi pass  in  one  day  of 
Brahmã.    In  one  day  of Brahmã,  fourteen Manus and  fourteen Indras 
reign and die.  Each Manu and Indra reign for 308,571,428 years, six 
months,  twenty-five  days,  forty  two ghadi,  fifty  one  pal,  twenty-five 
nimish, and forty two and 
12
/
14
 lav.  Fourteen such Manus and Indras 

BHUGOL KHAGOL 
- 791 - 
are  created  and  destroyed  during  one  day  of Brahmã.    Countless 
creatures  die  throughout  the  day  of Brahmã.    This  is  called nitya-
pralay. 
 
12 
“When one night of Brahmã passes  and  he  retires  to  sleep,  the  ten 
loks   between   Svarg-Lok,   Mrutyu-Lok,   and   Pãtãl   are   destroyed.  
Brahmã’s night is as long as his day.  Therefore, one of Brahmã’s night 
and day together lasts for 8,640,000,000 human years.  The lower ten 
loks of the brahmãnd are therefore destroyed daily.  At the end of the 
day, a new set of loks are created, which in turn will be destroyed as 
well.    This  is  called nimit-pralay,  which  is  the  duration  of Brahmã’s 
whole day. 
 
13
 “Thirty days of Brahmã make  one  month;  twelve  months  make  one 
year;  and  a  hundred  years  is  the  lifespan  of Brahmã.    When Brahmã 
dies,  the brahmãnd,  which  consist  of  the  fourteen loks,  is  destroyed.  
Then,  all  the  entities  that  have  evolved  out  of Prakruti are  absorbed 
back into Prakruti.  This is called prãkrut-pralay. 
 
14 
“The fourth type of destruction is ãtyantik-pralay.    This  is  when 
countless  millions  of brahmãnds are  destroyed.    At  that  time,  even 
Prakruti-Purush draws countless brahmãnds within itself, and is then 
eclipsed by the light of Akshar.  This is called ãtyantik-pralay. 
 
15 
“At the time of creation, everything evolves from Prakruti-Purush in 
the  exact  reverse  order  from  which  it  was  absorbed  during  the  time 
of   destruction.      I   have   therefore   described   the   four   types   of 
destruction.   
 
16 
“The  third type of  destruction, prãkrut-pralay,  is  the  end  of  the 
lifespan of Brahmã.  A jeev misuses its human body, which it receives 
after  350,000,000 prãkrut-pralays,  for  the  sake  of  worthless  worldly 
pleasures and by the refuge of a false guru.  As a result, it has to suffer 
the   torments   of Yam-Rãj and   the   agonies   of   the   pits   of Narak.  

BHUGOL KHAGOL 
- 792 - 
Moreover, it receives another human birth in a place where kalyãn is 
attainable only after passing through the sufferings of the cycle of 8.4 
million  life  forms  (after another  350,000,000 prãkrut-pralays).    This 
is the interval before a jeev receives a human birth again. 
 
17 
“Therefore, having understood this today, and having sought the 
refuge  of  a  sadguru,  who  is  the  granter  of kalyãn,  and  having  kept 
your  body, indriyas,  and antah-karans in  accordance  with  his  wish, 
make every effort for the benefit of your ãtmã and reach the dhãm of 
Bhagvãn.    If  you  do  not  realise  this  fact  today  and waste  this human 
body, which is instrumental in attaining moksh, you will have to wait 
for  the  aforementioned  time  before  you  receive  another  chance  like 
this.  Only after such suffering and only at the end of that interval will 
you  receive  another  opportunity  to  attain moksh, and  that  too  if  you 
make every effort for it.  If you do not, you will not attain moksh.  This 
is a fundamental principle.  The wise should think about this.  On the 
other  hand,  fools  will  never  understand  this  since  they  have  no 
respect for the Shrutis or Smrutis.” 
 
|| Bhugol Khagol || 
 
 
|| End of Bhugol Khagol || 
 
 
 
   
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
GLOSSARY

Glossary 
- 794 - 
A  
abhedhya Indivisible. 
abhimãn Ego.  Arrogance.  The feeling of ‘I am something’. 
abhishek The pujã performed  by  bathing Bhagvãn with  five  items:  
milk, yoghurt, ghee, honey, and sugar. 
ãchãrya 1) A person who establishes a religious philosophy. 
2) Head   of   a sampradãy,   who   protects dharma.    A 
spiritual  leader  and guru,  who  initiates  a satsangi into 
the sampradãy.    There   are   two ãchãryas in   the 
Swãminãrãyan   Sampradãy;   one   for   northern   India 
(Amdãvãd  Gãdi),  and  one  for  southern  India  (Vadtãl 
Gãdi).    They  are  decedents  of  Dharma-Dev  (the  father 
of Swãminãrãyan    Bhagvãn).  Sahajãnand    Swami 
adopted   Ayodhyãprasãdji   from   His   elder   brother 
Rãmpratãpji,    and    adopted    Raghuvirji    from    His 
younger  brother  Ichhãrãmji.    Both  sons  then  became 
the     first     two ãchãryas of     the     Swãminãrãyan 
Sampradãy.   The ãchãrya a satsangi follows  depends 
on  where  they  live: satsangis living  in  northern  India 
fall  under  the  Amdãvãd  region,  and satsangis living  in 
southern India fall under the Vadtãl region. 
achhedhya Unbreakable.  Cannot be cut or divided. 
achyut Indestructible.  Never dies. 
adham-udhãran Saviour  of  sinners.    Frees  sinners  from  the  cycle  of  birth 
and death, so they can attain kalyãn. 
adharma Unrighteousness.      Immorality.      Sin.      The   opposite   of 
dharma, which causes dharma to decline.  
adhibhut 1) Organs of the indriyas.  The sthul body of the jeev. 
2) Five mahã-bhuts.  The sthul body of Virãt-Purush. 
adhidev 1) Main dev of the indriyas of the jeev. 
2) Main dev of the indriyas of Virãt-Purush. 
adhyãtma 1) Indriyas of the jeev. 
2) Indriyas of Virãt-Purush. 
Advait Non-dual.    The  philosophy greatly  proposed  by  Shankar-

Glossary 
- 795 - 
Ãchãrya  that  states  that  the  ultimate  reality  is  only  one 
substance – nirgun brahm – and  that  all  else  is  merely  an 
illusion. 
ãgnã A command. 
agni Fire. 
Agni-Dev The dev of fire. 
ahankãr 1) Ego.  The sense of ‘I-ness’. 
2) One  of  the  four antah-karans,  with  the  functions  of 
giving rise to the sense of self and individual existence.  
It   is   a   product   of maha-tattva from   which   the 
remaining tattvas are   produced.      By   nature,   it   is 
passive, dense, and totally ignorant. 
ahinsã 1) Non-violence – mentally, verbally, and physically. 
2) One  of  the panch-vartmãn:    do  not  kill  other  living 
beings, and do not eat meat. 
Ãhir A   class   of   people   of   the vaishya varna traditionally 
engaged in commercial activities. 
aishvaryãrthi A  person  who  worships Bhagvãn with  the  intention  of 
earning powers to create the world.  He is the lowest type 
of bhakta.  [Ashlãli – 1] 
akartum The  non-doer.   Bhagvãn does  not  do  anything,  as  He  has 
delegated responsibilities to devs. 
ãkãsh Space.    One  of  the  five bhuts,  from  which  the  physical 
world  (Virãt-Purush)  is  formed.    It  provides  space  for  all 
jeevs, is the cause of the internal and external activities of 
their  bodies,  and  is  also  where  the prãns, indriyas,  and 
antah-karans reside.   Ãkãsh is  the  greatest  of  the  five 
bhuts,  as  it  supports  and  pervades  all  of  the  other  four 
bhuts, yet remains unaffected by them. 
Akshar 1) Imperishable.    In  his  personal  form, Akshar serves 
Bhagvãn in Akshardhãm,  and  takes  birth  on  earth  as 
His  ideal bhakta (sat-purush).    Both  forms  are  human 
in  appearance.    In  his  impersonal  form, Akshar is  the 
dhãm of Bhagvãn called Akshardhãm.      In   his   all-
pervading anvay form, Akshar is   called Chidãkãsh.  

Glossary 
- 796 - 
Also referred to as Akshar-Brahm or Brahm. 
2) Second-highest of the five eternal entities (jeev, ishvar, 
Mãyã, and Akshar, and Parbrahm). 
Akshar-Brahm See Akshar. 
Akshardhãm 1) The  highest dhãm of Bhagvãn.    The  divine dhãm of 
Purushottam   Bhagvãn   Swãminãrãyan,   where   He   is 
forever  seated  before  the  countless muktas who  have 
attained qualities similar to those of Akshar. 
2) The formless svarup form of Akshar. 
akshar-mukta 1) A jeev which  has  qualities  similar  to  those  of Akshar.  
Used  to  describe  the  spiritual  state  of akshar-muktas.  
The   highest   level   of   faith   or   spiritual   status   is   to 
become akshar-rup and worship Bhagvãn.  [Loyã – 12]. 
2) Is  also  sometimes  used  to  describe  things  that  have 
attained    qualities    similar    to Akshar through    his 
contact,  [Gadhadã  II – 13]  attained  ultimate kalyãn, 
and resides forever in Akshardhãm with a divya body. 
Akshar-Purush See Purush. 
akshar-rup 1) Like the form of Akshar. 
2) Possessing  qualities  similar  to  those  of Akshar.    Same 
as brahm-rup. 
akshi-vidyã Knowledge of the eyes.  A type of brahm-vidyã by which a 
person  sees  his ãtmã and  the murti of Bhagvãn through 
his eyes. [Loyã 15]. 
alok A region beyond this lok. 
alokik Divine.    Magnificent.    That  which  is  found  in Akshardhãm 
is described as alokik. 
Amãs New moon.  The last day of a lunar month; the 15th day of 
the dark half of an Indian calendar month. 
amrut Nectar.    A  magical  liquid  churned  from  the  ocean  by  the 
devs and   the   demons,   and   it   was   known   to   grant 
immortality  to  those  who  drink  it.  However,  this  means 
the ãtmã is  unable  to  break  free  from  the  cycle  of  births 
and deaths. 
Amrutdhãm See Akshardhãm. 

Glossary 
- 797 - 
analpakshi Bird of fire.  Large, legendary bird that never lands on the 
ground and it has the strength to carry seven elephants. 
ãnãnd Blissful.  Enjoyable. Happiness. 
Anant-Apãr See Akshardhãm. 
andaj Born  from  an  egg.    Life-forms  born  from  eggs  (birds, 
reptiles, and amphibians). 
angarkhu A long-sleeved, upper garment that is made of a thin cloth. 
It  reaches  down  to  the  knees,  and  is  tied  with  strings  on 
the left side of the chest. 
Aniruddha One  of the  four  forms  of Bhagvãn’s Vishvarup svarup.    His 
role  is  to  teach dharma,  and  to  cause  the  creation  of  the 
brahmãnd (Virãt-Purush).    During  the  state  of  creation, 
Virãt-Purush worships Aniruddha. 
ankush An  instrument  used  to  control  an  elephant.    A chihn on 
Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn’s right foot.  Performing dhyãn on 
this chihn enables  a bhakta to  control  his  mind,  and  to 
become strong in worshipping Bhagvãn. 
antah-karan Inner  ability.    The  complete  mind  which  is  made  up  of 
four parts: man (generating thoughts and desires); buddhi 
(consolidating thoughts, making decisions and 
resolutions,  forming  convictions,  or  discriminating);  chitt 
(repeatedly  contemplating  or  focusing);  and  the ahankãr 
(forming  a  sense  of being).  It  is  also  referred  to  as  a 
singular  as  all  four  are  parts  make  up  one antah-karan, 
but  usually  referred   to  as  being  four  different antah-
karans. 
antar-drashti To  look  inwards.    Meditate.    To  look  inwards  at  the jeev.  
To direct the internal or external vrutti towards the murti 
of Bhagvãn is itself antar-drashti. 
antaryãmi 1) Inner controller.   Power  of Bhagvãn to reside within a 
jeev and ishvar,  and  control  its  each  and  every  action.  
This  means  that Bhagvãn knows  its  deepest  thoughts 
and feelings. 
2) The knower of all thoughts of everyone, everywhere. 
antya End. Final. 

Glossary 
- 798 - 
anu  An   essential,   universal,   and   atom-like   unit   of   matter.  
Smallest building block of creation. 
anvay Not separate.  United.  Associated.  Connected.  When used 
for Bhagvãn,  it  implies  that  He  inherently  exists  within.  
[Gadhadã I – 7]. 
anyathã-kartum The  all-doer  and  non-doer.    Even  though Bhagvãn is  the 
cause of everything, He does not do anything Himself.  He 
has  delegated  responsibilities  to  the devs.    For  example, 
Kãl and is responsible for death. 
apsãrã A beautiful, heavenly dancer. 
archimãrg Road  of fire.    Is  traditionally  thought  of as  the  path  to  the 
sun,  but  it  is  also  the  path  to  the dhãm of Bhagvãn which 
is taken by the jeev after death. 
ardha-chandra Half moon.  A chihn on Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn’s left foot.  
The  moon  symbolises  peace.    A bhakta performing dhyãn 
on   this chihn overcomes   all   miseries   and   experiences 
inner  peace  and  profound  happiness.    Also,  just  as  the 
night-lotus  blossoms  due  to  the  light  of  the  moon,  the 
bhakta blossoms  with bhakti and shraddhã through  the 
light of Bhagvãn. 
ardhamãtrã Half a letter. 
ãrta A  person  who  is  distressed  from  having  fallen  from  the 
path  of  attaining siddh-dashã,  but  still  wishes  to  attain  it.  
One of the four types of bhaktas. 
arth One of the  four purushãrths, allowing for the fulfilment  of 
desires    for    material    objects,    in particular    wealth.  
[Amdãvãd 5]. 
arthãthi A  person  who  desires  material  objects,  such  as  material 
pleasures and powers.  One of the four types of bhaktas. 
ãrti A form of worship, in which lighted wicks, soaked in ghee, 
are  gently  waved  before  the murti of Bhagvãn,  and  is 
accompanied   by  a  song  that  praises  Him.    The  flame 
acquires  the  power  of Bhagvãn.   Bhaktas then  pass  their 
down-turned  hands  over  the  flame  and  then  raise  their 
palms  to  their  forehead – the  blessings  of Bhagvãn pass 

Glossary 
- 799 - 
from  the  flame  to  the bhakta.    The ãrti of  a dev or  great 
person can also be performed (but not at the same time as 
Bhagvãn’s ãrti). 
ãsan 1) Seat.  A sitting posture in yog. 
2) Third   step   of ashtãng-yog,   which   involves   physical 
exercises of postures to promote concentration. 
asat 1) False. 
2) Temporary, perishable, and changing.  Is bound by the 
past, present, and future. 
asat-purush A  false sant. An asat-purush person  believes  that  all  male 
and   female svarups in   this   world   have   been   created 
through Mãyã and   the Purush, Virãt,   and svarup of 
Bhagvãn,    implying    that    all    of    these svarups are 
manifestations  of Bhagvãn Himself.    He  also  believes  that 
if  his  mind  is  attracted  towards  a  higher  or  lower svarup 
of either a male or female, he should perform dhyãn upon 
that very svarup in order to attain instantaneous samãdhi. 
asatya False.  Imaginary.  Illusionary. 
ãshã To want.  Desire. 
Ashãdh First  month  of  the Ãshãdhi Samvat year,  normally falling 
between June and July. 
ashram 1) Stage of life.  There are four ãshrams in total, each with 
their   duties   and   responsibilities – brahm-chãrya, 
grahastha, vãnprasth, and sannyãs. 
2) Hermitage.  Place where tyãgis live. 
ãshrit Disciple.  Devotee.  Follower. 
ashtakon An  octagon.    A chihn on Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn’s right 
foot.    Performing dhyãn on  this chihn grants  a bhakta the 
fruits  of ashtãng-yog.    He  also  attains Akshardhãm,  which 
is beyond the eight barriers. 
ashtãng-yog The  practice  of  focusing  and  quieting  the  fluctuations  of 
the  mind  through  various  physical  and  mental  practices, 
and   ultimately   aiming   for   the yog,   the   union   with 
Bhagvãn.  The  eight  progressive  steps  of ashtãng-yog are: 
yam (restraint), niyam (observance), ãsan (seat    or 

Glossary 
- 800 - 
posture), prãnãyãm (controlling   the prãns), pratyãhãr 
(withdrawal), dhãrnã (concentration), dhyãn 
(meditation),  and samãdhi (trance).    The  first  four  steps 
are  physical  practices,  whereas  the  last  four  steps  are 
mental practices. 
Ãso Fourth month of the Ãshãdhi Samvat year, normally falling 
between September and October. 
ãsopãlav A tall evergreen tree, called Polyalthia longifolia, native to 
India.    Its leaves  are  used  in  rituals  and  on  religious 
occasions as decoration. 
ãstik 1) A  person  who  believes  in  the  existence  of Bhagvãn, 
and is religious.  Opposite of nãstik. 
2) Describes  people  or shãstras that  accept  the  authority 
and authenticity of the Veds. 
asur Demon.  Evil person. 
asuyã Similar to envy.  
ãtmã 1) The  pure jeev,  which  is  distinct  from  the  three  bodies 
and three mental states, and distinct from the indriyas, 
the antah-karans,  worldly  desires,  or  any  other  traces 
of Mãyã.    It  is  imperishable  and  eternal,  does  not 
undergo births or deaths, and it leaves a physical body 
after  that  body  dies  and  assumes  another  physical 
body.  Infinite in number. 
2) That which pervades, inspires, and controls. 
ãtmã-nishthã Knowledge of the jeev.  The belief that a person is an ãtmã, 
which is imperishable and eternal. 
ãtmã-nivedi A  person  who  offers ãtmã-nivedanam,  the  ninth  type  of 
bhakti.    A bhakta who  has  totally  surrendered jeev to 
Bhagvãn.  A  person  whose  every  action  is  an  offering  to 
Bhagvãn and  who  has Bhagvãn at  the  centre  of  his  every 
action. 
ãtyantik Ultimate.  Final. 
ãtyantik kalyãn See moksh. 
ãtyantik-pralay Final   destruction.      Destruction   of   all   of   the   countless 
millions  of brahmãnds,  when  even Prakruti-Purush draws 

Glossary 
- 801 - 
in  countless brahmãnds within  itself,  and  is  then  eclipsed 
by  the  light  of  Akshar.    In ãtyantik-pralay,  only Bhagvãn, 
Akshar,  and  the akshar-muktas remain. Also  called gnãn-
pralay. 
ãval Type of small shrub whose leaves have healing qualities. 
avasthã State. Condition. Used to describe the three mental states: 
jãgrat, svapna, and sushupti. 
avatãr Incarnation  of Bhagvãn.  He  incarnates  on  Earth  for  the 
welfare of society and for the kalyãn of the jeevs. Bhagvãn 
is    always    present    in Bharat-Khand through    these 
incarnations  or  His sãdhus.  He  assumes  various avatãrs 
according  to  whichever  task  needs  to  be  accomplished  in 
whichever   place,   and   each avatãr possesses   varying 
amounts of Bhagvãn’s power. 
 
Descriptions  of  many avatãrs are  listed  in  the shãstras; 
ten  are  regarded  as  major avatãrs,  with  a  greater  degree 
of the presence of Bhagvãn than others. 
 
The most common list of the twenty-four avatãrs stated in 
the  Purãns  are:  [1] Sanakãdik,  [2] Varãh,  [3] Matsya,  [4] 
Hayagriv, [5] Hans, [6] Yagna, [7] Kurma, [8] Dhanvantari, 
[9] Mohini, [10] Pruthu, [11] Nãrad, [12] Rushabh-Dev [13] 
Dattãtrey,  [14] Kapil-Dev,  [15] Nar-Nãrãyan,  [16] Hari, 
[17] Nrusinh, [18] Vãman, [19] Parshurãm, [20] Vyãs, [21] 
Rãm, [22] Krishna, [23] Buddh, and [24] Kalki. 
 
Of these, the ten major avatãrs of Bhagvãn are: [1] Matsya, 
[2] Kurma,   [3] Varãh, [4] Nrusinh,   [5] Vãman,   [6] 
Parshurãm,  [7] Rãm,  [8] Krishna,  [9] Buddh,  and  [10] 
Kalki. 
avatãri The  cause  of  all avatãrs.   Swãminãrãyan  Bhagvãn.    All 
avatãrs emerge from Him.  
avidyã Knowledge  and  understanding   of  all  that  has  evolved 
from Mãyã,  and  is mãyik.    False  understanding  of  the 
nature of reality.  Ignorance. 
avinãshi Eternal.  Everlasting.  Imperishable.  Indestructible. 
avyãkrut The fundamental body of the three bodies of Virãt-Purush 

Glossary 
- 802 - 
and  other ishvars.    Equivalent  to  the kãran body  of  the 
jeevs.  [Kãriyãni – 12]. 
  
B  
bãdhitãnu vrutti To recall something that has been falsified.  A mental state 
in which a person fears the possibility of becoming bound 
again to  objects that have already  been  mentally falsified, 
and no affection remains.  [Gadhadã III – 4]. 
Badrikãshram 1) An ãshram with   orchards   of   badri-trees – trees 
bearing  small,  slightly  sour  apple-like  fruits,  called 
badri-fruits in Sanskrit. 
2) The dhãm of Nar-Nãrãyan.    Considered  to  be  full  of 
orchards of badri-trees. 
3) The muktas that  reside  in  this dhãm are ãtmãs who 
have  been  freed  from  the  cycle  of  births  and  deaths, 
but   have   not   yet   attained Akshardhãm.      So,   they 
perform  continuous tap,  in  order  to  attain  ultimate 
moksh. 
bãhya-drashti To look outwards. To look at the world. 
bãjubandh Decorative     jewellery     tied     around     the     upper-arm. 
Swãminãrãyan  Bhagvãn often  wore bãjubandh made  of 
flowers. 
Baldevji  The  elder  brother of Shree  Krishna.  He is considered as a 
partial avatãr of Vishnu or an avatãr of Shesh, the serpent 
on   which Vishnu sleeps.    Baldevji was   the   symbol   of 
strength,   an   obedient   son,   and   an   ideal   brother   and 
husband.  Also called Balrãm. 
Bãl-Mukund The murti of Shree Krishna in His child svarup. 
berkhã Strings of flowers tied around the wrist. 
Bhãdarvã Third  month  of the Ãshãdhi Samvat year,  normally  falling 
between August and September. 
Bhagvad Geetã Song of Bhagvãn.  One of the most popular Hindu shãstras.  
It   comprises   of   a   dialogue   between Arjun and Shree 
Krishna,   at   the   beginning   of   the   battle   between   the 
feuding   cousins,   the   Pãndavs   and   the   Kauravs.      The 

Glossary 
- 803 - 
Bhagvad  Geetã  forms  a  portion  of the  epic  Mahãbhãrat  in 
which Shree Krishna enlightens  Arjun  on karma, bhakti 
and gnãn,  and  inspires  him  to  selflessly  fulfil  his  duty  of 
fighting  for dharma and  against adharma by  the  strength 
and will of Bhagvãn.  One of the eight shãstras accepted as 
trustworthy by Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn. 
Bhagvãn God.  Supreme being.  Lord of all.  Bhagvãn is unparalleled, 
omnipotent  and  the  all-doer,  omniscient,   omnipresent, 
the   ocean   of   all   forms   of   bliss,   does   not   have   any 
attributes of Mãyã, is divine, and is always taking birth on 
earth  for  His bhaktas.    Resides  within  the ãtmã.    Also 
called Parbrahm, Paramãtmã, Purushottam, Krishna 
Nãrãyan, and Swãminãrãyan. 
bhagvan-nishtãrthi A  person  who  has  a  constant  and  singular  determination 
for  the sevã of   the pratyaksha  svarup of Purushottam 
Bhagvãn.  He is the best bhakta of all.  [Ashlãli – 1] 
bhãgvat bhakta A bhakta who  follows bhãgvat  dharma,  which  consists  of 
dharma, gnãn, vairãgya,   and bhakti coupled   with   the 
knowledge of Bhagvãn's greatness. 
bhãgvat dharma 1) Dharma related   to Bhagvãn.      The dharma which 
avatãrs of Bhagvãn come to  establish, and the dharma 
which  was  adopted  by Nãrad,  the Sanakãdik,  Shukji, 
Dhruv, Prahlãd, Ambrish and other bhaktas.  This form 
of dharma is not different from bhakti itself. 
2) Collective term for dharma, gnãn, vairãgya, and bhakti 
coupled  with  the  knowledge  of Bhagvãn's greatness.  
This  will  lead  a  person  to  become  an ekãntik  bhakta 
who crosses Bhagvãn's Mãyã and attains His dhãm. 
3) Also called ekãntik dharma. 
bhãgvati dikshã Initiation into a sampradãy.   A person may receive a guru 
mantra. 
bhajan Worship. 
bhakta Devotee of Bhagvãn.  A follower of Bhagvãn. 
Bhakti The devi of bhakti. 
bhakti Devotion to Bhagvãn.  One of the four attributes of ekãntik 
dharma.  There are nine types of bhakti: 

Glossary 
- 804 - 
 shravanam – listening  to kathãs or kirtans related  to 
Bhagvãn. 
 kirtanam – singing or talking about Bhagvãn. 
 smaranam – remembering Bhagvãn. 
 pãd-sevanam – massaging Bhagvãn's holy feet. 
 archanam – performing Bhagvãn’s pujã (ãrti, thãl, 
smearing sandalwood paste,). 
 vandanam – bowing before Bhagvãn. 
 dãsyam – behaving as the servant of Bhagvãn. 
 sakhyam – behaving as the friend of Bhagvãn. 
 ãtma-nivedanam – unconditionally offering everything 
to Bhagvãn. 
 
Where  the  ten  types  of bhakti are  mentioned,  the  tenth 
type  is prem-lakshanã  bhakti – profound,  loving bhakti. 
[Gadhadã III – 33] 
bhang An intoxicating drink produced from cannabis leaves. 
Bharat-Khand Ancient  India,  considered  to  have  stretched  westward  to 
present-day  Turkey,  eastward  to  present-day  Burma,  and 
beyond  the  Himalayan  mountain  range  in  the  north.    Is 
considered  to  be  the  best  of  the  nine khands of  Jambu-
Dvip  because  those  who  attain  birth  in  this  region  can 
potentially  attain kalyãn due  to  the  constant  presence  of 
Bhagvãn's avatãr or Bhagvãn's sant. 
bhekh-dhãri Sãdhu.  Tyãgi. 
Bhumã -Purush The svarup of Bhagvãn that resides in Avyãkrut. 
bhut A  physical  element  from  which  the sthul body  of Virãt-
Purush (the  physical  world)  is  formed.    There  are  five 
bhuts in  total – pruthvi, jal, tej, vãyu and ãkãsh.  They  are 
collectively called the five bhuts or five mahã-bhuts. 
bokãni Cloth  tied  around  the  head,  with  one  end  crossing  from 
under the chin to cover the ears and cheeks.  Worn during 
cold weather. 
bordi A  tree  bearing  delicate  flowers  amid  small thorns  and 
small, slightly sour apple-like fruits called bors.  Found  to 
grow  naturally  in  unattended  fields  or  jungles  due  to  its 
resilient roots. 

Glossary 
- 805 - 
borsali Tiny,   delicate,   white,   and   extremely   fragrant   flowers 
called Mimusops  elengi.  The  most  exotic  of  all  the  flowers 
mentioned  in  the  Vachanãmrut.  The  flowers  grow  on  a 
tree,  facing  downwards.    After  the  flower  withers  and 
falls,  a  green  seed  pod  appears,  which  ripens  into  a  red 
berry. 
brahm 1) A jeev is  said  to  become brahm when  it  has  attained  a 
nirgun state, and all the qualities of Brahm. 
2) Believed  by shushka-vedãntis to  be  the nirgun and 
formless reality, where all else is merely an illusion. 
Brahm 1) The dhãm of Bhagvãn.    It  is  eternal,  complete  with  all 
gun,  luminous,  and  flawless.  Also  called Akshar,  or 
Akshar-Brahm, or Akshardhãm. 
2) Fourth  of  the  five  eternal  entities,  which  transcends 
everything except Purushottam (jeev, ishvar, Mãyã, and 
Brahm, and Parbrahm).   
Brahmã The dev responsible for the  creation of the brahmãnd and 
the  life-forms  within  it.  Part  of  the  trinity  of devs,  along 
with Vishnu (the   sustainer)   and Shiv (the   destroyer), 
responsible for the control of one brahmãnd.  
brahm-agni Bhagvãn.    When  a  person  performs  a sãttvik yagna by 
withdrawing  the  ten indriyas and  the  mind  (the  eleventh 
indriya)    from    whichever vishays they    have    become 
attached  to,  he  offers  them  into brahm-agni.    The ãtmã 
and Bhagvãn then become one. 
brãhman Priest.     A   religious  and  educated  scholar   traditionally 
assigned  duties  of  worship,  performing  rites  and  rituals, 
and  teaching.    The  highest  of  the  four varnas (castes)  of 
the ancient Indian social system. 
brahmãnd Individual  'universe'  comprising  of  a  system  of  fourteen 
loks.      There   are   countless   millions   of brahmãnds on 
various planes.  Each brahmãnd, created and sustained by 
a   Pradhãn-Purush   pair,   contains   a   trinity   of Brahmã, 
Vishnu, and Shiv as the controlling devs.  The fourteen loks 
of   each brahmãnd are:   Satya-Lok,   Tap-Lok,   Jan-Lok, 
Mahar-Lok,   Svarg-Lok,   Bhuvar-Lok,   Mrutyu-Lok,   Atal, 
Vital, Sutal, Talãtal, Mahãtal, Rasãtal, Pãtãl. 
brahmarshi A tyãgi or    a    person    engaged    in    strict tap,    with 

Glossary 
- 806 - 
characteristics like that of a rushi.  At a higher level than a 
rãjarshi. 
brahmãy Divine. 
brahm-chãri 1) A brãhman who  has  been  initiated  as  a tyãgi into  the 
Swãminãrãyan sampradãy.    Such brahm-chãris were 
given   special   priestly   authority,   such   as   personal 
sevaks to   the murtis within mandirs,   and   as   the 
performers of other religious ceremonies. 
2) A  person  who  observes brahm-chãrya;  leads  a  life  of 
celibacy. 
3) A person who is in the first stage of life, brahm-chãrya 
ãshram. 
brahm-chãrya 1) Celibacy.  For tyãgis, eight types of brahm-chãrya have 
been prescribed, which prevent them from associating 
with the opposite gender in the following ways: 
 shravanam - listening to or about 
 keertanam - talking to or about 
 keli - frolicking with 
 prekshanam - intentionally looking at 
 guhyabhãshanam - privately conversing with 
 sankalp - fantasising about 
 adhyavasãya - thinking of 
 kriyã - intercourse with 
 
2) For    a grahastha male, brahm-chãrya constitutes 
avoiding  all  women  except  his  wife,  abstaining  from 
sexual  relations  with  his  wife  on  days  of vrat,  and 
engaging  in  sexual  relations  with  her  only  during  the 
appropriate times.  [Gadhadã I – 34]. 
brahm-chãrya 
ãshram 
First  of  the  four  stages  of  life,  when  a  person  fulfils  his 
duty  as  a  student  and  celibate.    At  the  end  of brahm-
chãrya ashram,  a  person  either  gets  married  and  enters 
grahastha ãshram, or becomes a tyãgi and  enters sannyãs 
ãshram. 
brãhm-kalp Period   of   time   during   the   process   of   creation   when 
Bhagvãn gave  all  beings,  from Brahmã to  the  smallest 
blade  of  grass  their  bodies,  through  his  own  body  in  the 
form of Virãt-Purush. Length of brahm-kalp time of one of 
Brahmã's days (4.32 x 10
9
 human years). 

Glossary 
- 807 - 
Brahm-Mahol See Akshardhãm. 
Brahmpur See Akshardhãm. 
brahm-randhra Spiritual  opening  in  the  crown  of  the  head  (at  the  end  of 
the sushumnã nãdi)  through  which  the jeev leaves  the 
body  upon  death  or  during samãdhi,  and  reaches  higher 
loks. A shikhã is kept at the brahm-randhra. 
brahm-rup  1) Like the form of Brahm. 
2) Possessing  qualities  similar  to  those  of Brahm.    Same 
as akshar-rup. 
brahm-sattã 1) Formless svarup of Brahm. 
2) Also refers to the ãtmã, which is eternal. 
brahm-svarup Form  of brahm.  Possessing  qualities  similar  to  those  of 
Brahm.  Also called akshar-rup. 
brahm-vidyã Knowledge of brahm.  Knowledge that guides a person on 
the path to Bhagvãn. 
Bruhaspati The guru of the devs. 
Buddh An avatãr of Bhagvãn.    He  incarnated  in  the svarup of  an 
enlightened sãdhu.      He    was   born   a   prince    named 
Siddhãrth.      A brãhman had   predicted   that   Siddhãrth 
would  either  become  a  great  king  or  a  great tyãgi as  a 
result of seeing suffering and death.  Siddhãrth eventually 
left  home  and  became  a sãdhu.    He  attained  great  peace 
and knowledge, and became enlightened.  He then became 
known as Buddh.  He preached the philosophy of ahinsã to 
all  who  could  hear  Him.    He  taught  that  all  sorrow  comes 
from attachments and desires, so it's better to abandon all 
attachments in order to remain happy. 
buddhi 1) Intellect.  Intelligence. 
2) One  of  the four antah-karans,  with  the  functions  of 
consolidating thoughts, making decisions and 
resolutions,   forming   beliefs,   or   discriminating.      It 
possesses  the  knowledge  of  all  objects  and  is  also  the 
reason  for  the  specific  knowledge  which  all  of  the 
indriyas possess.    Its  inherent  features  are  doubts, 
belief, sleep and memory. 

Glossary 
- 808 - 
  
C  
chãdar A thick blanket. 
chãdar A  thin  blanket.    Was  used  by  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  during  the 
cooler months. 
chaitanya Consciousness.    The  substance  of  the ãtmã.    A  higher 
consciousness that is beyond the physical world, which is 
jad and mãyik.  It is indestructible. 
chaitanya prakruti  All   things   that   are chetan or   animate,   and   possess 
chaitanya or   consciousness.      Living   elements.    The 
element of life (chaitanya), by which this world is upheld. 
Chaitra Tenth month of the Ãshãdhi Samvat year, normally falling 
between March and April. 
chãkhadi Wooden,  strapless  sandals  worn  specifically  by tyãgis for 
simplicity and personal discipline. 
chakor An  Indian  bird.    The chakor becomes  hypnotised  by  the 
appearance   of   the   full   moon.      The   chakor   remains 
motionless  for  the  entire  night,  except  for  its  head  that 
slowly follows the moon across the sky, until it bends and 
finally rests backwards upon the ground. 
chakra 1) A  razor-bladed  disc.    One  of Bhagvãn’s weapons.    Also 
called sudarshan chakra.  
2) Wheel.      According   to   yogic   practices, chakras are 
centres  of  spiritual  power  and  consciousness  located 
within  the  inner  body.    The  six chakras are:  ãgnã, 
vishuddh,  anãhat,  manipur,  svãdhisthãn,  ãdhãr.    Each 
chakra has its corresponding location and dev. 
chakshu Eyes.  Physical organ of sight (one of the indriyas). 
chameli A    flower    of    the    jasmine    genus    called Jasminum 
grandiflorum or  Spanish  jasmine.    It  has  a  white  colour 
and extremely sweet fragrance.  Usually found to blossom 
during the month of Shrãvan.  The chameli plant is a vine, 
whereas mogrã and dolariyã (also  part  of  the  jasmine 
genus) are shrubs. 

Glossary 
- 809 - 
champã A  flower  of  the Plumeria genus.    It  is  white  with  a  yellow, 
red, or pink centre. 
chãndlo Small,  round  red  or  yellow  mark  applied  in  the  centre  of 
the  forehead  indicating  that  a  person  is  a  Hindu.    Usually 
made of either of kum-kum or of sandalwood paste.  
Chandra-Dev The dev of the Moon.  The dev of the man. 
chãndrãyan Strict  form  of  fasting  where  a  person's  intake  of  food  is 
regulated  by  the  waxing  and  waning  of  the  moon.    For 
example,  one  form  is  to  increase  food  intake  from  one 
small piece of food at the beginning of a new lunar month 
rising  to  fifteen  small  pieces  on Punam,  then  decreasing 
again  to  a  complete  fast  by Amãs;  or,  beginning  with 
fifteen  small  pieces  of  food  at  the  beginning  of  a  new 
month  and  decreasing  to  a  complete  fast  on Punam,  then 
increasing  again  to  fifteen  small  pieces  by Amãs.    Other 
forms involve having only eight small pieces a day, or four 
small pieces twice a day, or merely three pieces a day. 
chãran A  heavenly  poet.    Member  of  a  specific  class  of  people, 
considered  heavenly  in  origin,  as  they  were  employed  by 
devs to   compose   and   recite   verses   celebrating   their 
exploits. 
charitra A divine incident of Bhagvãn. 
chaul sanskãr The  ceremony  performed  when  the  hair  of  a  child  is 
removed.  This is the first time the child’s hair is cut. 
chetan That which possesses chaitanya (full of consciousness). 
chhint Indian cotton cloth on which a pattern has been produced 
by  dyeing  and  hand  drawing  with  a  bamboo.    Chhint 
would  usually  have  been  made  smooth  or  glossy  with  a 
shell  or  beaten  with  wooden  mallets  to  produce  a shiny 
surface. 
chhoglu A  bunch  of  cloth  either  emerging  from  the  end  of  a pãgh 
or  left  hanging  from  one  side.  Sometimes  inserted  into  a 
pãgh when made of a string of flowers. 
Chidãkãsh Akshardhãm.      Formless   and   pure chaitanya form   of 
Akshar.      By   nature, it   is   the   all-supporting   and   all-

Glossary 
- 810 - 
pervading ãkãsh,   extremely   luminous,   not   subject   to 
change,  and  eternal,  within  which Purush and Prakruti 
undergo  their  states  of  expansion  and  contraction.    Also 
known as Brahm. 
chihn A sign.  Refers to a birthmark or scar. 
chintãmani A   divine   gemstone   that   fulfils   all   of   the   wishes   of 
whomever posses it. 
chitt Consciousness.    One  of  the  four antah-karans,  with  the 
functions  of  contemplating  or  pondering  and  especially 
focusing.        Mental    impressions    and    experiences    are 
recorded    and    recalled    from    it.        The    entire    world 
inherently resides in a subtle form within it, and it is itself 
unchanging,  luminous,  pure, full  of  pure sattva-gun and 
passive. 
chofãl A thick shawl, made of cotton. 
chokadi Of  four.    The  time  of  four yugs (Satya-Yug, Tretã-Yug, 
Dvãpar-Yug, and Kali-Yug).  Also called Mahã-Yug. 
  
D  
dagli Waistcoat with inner lining, usually worn in cold weather. 
dahar-vidyã Knowledge  of  the  inner ãkãsh.    Knowledge  of Chidãkãsh.  
One of the thirty-two types of brahm-vidyã.  [Loyã 15]. 
dambh Hypocrisy.  To outwardly pretend to possess a quality to a 
great extent in order to impress others. 
dandvat pranãm Bowing  down  before Bhagvãn.    Men  perform ashtãng 
pranãm with  eight  parts  of  their  body,  whereas  women 
perform panchãng pranãm with  five  parts  of  the  body.  
The dandvat pranãm symbolises the breaking of our mãn.  
The  mind must  be kept on Bhagvãn while  performing the 
dandvat pranam. 
darbãr Court    of    residence    belonging    to    a    king    or    ruler, 
traditionally   with   a   central   courtyard   surrounded   by 
rooms with balconies. 

Glossary 
- 811 - 
darshan Seeing.    To  see  with  admiration  and  devotion.    To  see 
Bhagvãn,  a sat-purush,  and murtis,  with  inner  or  outer 
vision,  with  the  intention  of  receiving  their  grace  and 
blessings.    By  doing darshan properly  a bhakta develops 
affection for Bhagvãn, and Bhagvãn develops affection for 
that bhakta.  [Sãrangpur – 2]. 
dãs A servant. 
Dattatrey An avatãr of Bhagvãn,  born  to  Ansuyã  and  Atri  Rushi.  
Bhagvãn incarnated   in   the   combined svarup Brahmã, 
Vishnu, and Shiv.  He has three heads (Brahmã, Vishnu, and 
Shiv)  with  one  body.   Dattãtrey had  twenty-four gurus: 
earth,  air,  sky,  water,  fire,  sun,  moon,  python,  pigeon,  sea, 
moth, bee, elephant, bear, deer, fish, osprey, child, maiden, 
prostitute,   blacksmith,   serpent,   spider,   and   wasp.      He 
perceived gun in  His  twenty-four gurus.    He  believed  that 
in the world, a man can learn from each and every thing. 
deh Body. 
desh A region or place. 
dev A  demi-god  who  is  given  powers  and  responsibilities  in 
the  universe,  and  who  lives  in  a  higher lok.   Devs are 
bhaktas of Bhagvãn and follow His ãgnã. 
devi A demi-goddess. 
dhãm The  divine  home  of Bhagvãn.  Wherever Bhagvãn resides 
is called dhãm. 
dhanush A  bow;  symbolises  humility  and  strength.    A chihn on 
Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn’s left  foot.  Performing dhyãn on 
this chihn makes   a bhakta humble,   wise,   polite,   and 
fearless.   It also enables him to overcome inner enemies. 
Dhanvantari An avatãr of Bhagvãn.  He  incarnated  in  the svarup of  the 
physician of the devs. He introduced the world to Ãyurved 
medicine and surgery. For this reason, He is known as the 
father of Ãyurved. 
Dharma The dev of dharma. 
dharma 1) Universal  law  or  principle  that  'sustains'  or  'upholds' 
the   entire   world.   Righteousness,   morality,   religion, 

Glossary 
- 812 - 
responsibility, and duty.  
2) The practice of religious disciplines and duties, such as 
niyams – including honesty, brahm-chãrya, and ahinsã.  
One    of    the    four    attributes    of ekãntik dharma.  
Sometimes   referred   to   as   the 'dharma of   the   four 
varna and ãshrams’,  which  are  summarised  in  the 
panch-vartmãn. 
3) One of the four purushãrths, allowing for the fulfilment 
of a person's personal, domestic, and social duties. 
dharma-
dhurandhar  
The upholder and protector of dharma. 
Dharma-Kul Family  of  Dharma-Dev  (Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn’s father).  
Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn’s family.      The Ãchãrya of   our 
sampradãy are decedents  Dharma-Dev,  and  are  therefore 
the family of Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn.  
Dharma-Rãj The  lord  of Yampuri,  who  protects dharma by  punishing 
those who have sinned. Also called Yam-Rãj. 
Dharma-Shãstra A  set  of shãstras coding  the  basic  laws  and  principles  of 
civil  and  social  conduct.    They  integrate  spirituality  and 
political   law   by   including   the   discussion   of   creation, 
stages  of  life,  duties  of  daily  living, tap,  and  study  of  the 
Veds.  A part of the Smruti literature. 
dhãrnã Concentration.      The   sixth   step   of ashtãng-yog,   which 
involves    focusing    the    mind    to    guide    the    flow    of 
consciousness. 
dhoti An  unstitched,  long  piece  of  cloth  traditionally  worn  by 
males as a lower garment.  It is usually wound around the 
waist with one  end tucked in after passing it  between the 
legs. Also known as 'dhotiyu'. 
Dhruv Star Fixed star.  North Star.  This star is used by travellers as a 
useful  navigational  reference  marking  due  north.    Named 
after a devout bhakta named Dhruv. 
dhun Form   of jap often   to   the   accompaniment   of   musical 
instruments. 
dhvaj A  flag.    A chihn on Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn’s right  foot.    A 
flag  sits  above  a mandir,  and  is  also  carried  by  the  chief 

Glossary 
- 813 - 
warrior   of   an   army.      A   flag   also   symbolises   victory.   
Performing dhyãn on  this chihn leads  a bhakta to  live  by 
the ãgnã of Bhagvãn, just as a flag flutters according to the 
direction of the wind.  It also helps a bhakta overcome lust 
and other material desires. 
dhyãn Meditation.      The   seventh   step   of ashtãng-yog,   which 
involves  sustaining  a  concentrated  state  where  the  mind 
is clear and calm. 
dikshã Initiation into a sampradãy or initiation as a sant. 
Divãli Series of oil lamps.  Last day of the Vikram Samvat Indian 
year.  The day of Amãs of the month of Ãso.  Very holy and 
joyous   Hindu   festival   celebrating   the   return   of Rãm 
Bhagvãn to Ayodhyã from his fourteen-year exile, and the 
victory  of  good  over  evil - signified  by  the  lighting  of  oil 
lamps to dispel the darkness. 
divya Divine. 
dolariyã White   flower   of   the   jasmine   genus   called Jasminum 
sambac,  whose  blossoming  buds  are  considered  to  be 
especially  beautiful  when  swaying in  the  wind – from 
which it gets its name. 
drashtã The  seer.    Generally  refers  to  the ãtmã as  the  observer, 
but can also refer to Bhagvãn as the observer within each 
ãtmã. 
drashya 1) Visible.    An  object  of  vision.    Often  referring  to  the 
physical body.  [Sãrangpur-12]. 
2) Also taken to mean the visible world as a whole. 
dudh-pãk Rich   item   of   food   made   of   sweetened   milk   and   rice, 
garnished with aromatic spices and nuts. 
dukad Pair  of  traditional  Indian  drums  used  to  provide  rhythm 
during the singing of kirtans. Similar to present-day tablã. 
durlabh Invaluable.  Rare.  Precious. 
Dvait Dual.        A    philosophical    principle    that    proposes    the 
eternally  distinct  natures  of  the jeev and Bhagvãn,  as 
opposed to the principle of the Advait philosophy.  This is 
the  philosophy  accepted  by  Rãmãnuj-Ãchãrya,  Rãmãnand 

Glossary 
- 814 - 
Swami, and Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn. 
Dvãpar-Yug Third  of  the  four yugs that  mark  the  time-scale  of  the 
world.  Lasting 864,000 human years, it  was an age when 
purity and righteousness diminished considerably, people 
lived  to  be  1,000,  and  the  system  of the  four varnas came 
into full operation. 
dvip Island, or a landmass resembling an island. 
  
E  
Ekãdashi 1) Eleventh day  of  the  bright  and  dark  halves  of  a  lunar 
month (ek+das = 1+10 = 11). 
2) Special religious vrat performed on this day which also 
involves fasting and control of the ten indriyas and the 
mind. 
3) Name  of  the  young  woman  who  was  created  from  the 
light   of Bhagvãn's ten indriyas and   mind   to   battle 
against Mur-Dãnav.   [Gadhadã II-8]. 
ekadmal Former sãdhu,  who  left satang due   to  some  personal 
misconduct or his inability to conform to the life of a tyãgi, 
and  travels  alone  without  a  companion sãdhu.    This  is 
against   the niyams set   by Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn in 
which sãdhus should never travel alone. 
ekãntik The   highest spiritual   state,   in   which   a   person   offers 
perfect bhakti to Bhagvãn along  with dharma, gnãn and 
vairãgya. 
ekãntik bhakta 1) Highest  level  of bhakta.    A  person  who  offers ekãntik 
bhakti,  perfectly  possesses  all  four  of  the  qualities  of 
ekãntik dharma (dharma, gnãn, vairãgya, and bhakti). 
2) A person who has no desires other than Bhagvãn, and 
who  worships Bhagvãn while  realising  himself  to  be 
brahm-rup.  [Gadhadã I – 11]. 
ekãntik dharma Collective  term  for dharma, gnãn, vairãgya,  and bhakti 
coupled with the knowledge of Bhagvãn's greatness.  This 
will  lead  a  person  to   become  an ekãntik  bhakta who 
crosses Bhagvãn's Mãyã and attains His dhãm.  Also called 
bhãgvat dharma. 

Glossary 
- 815 - 
ekãntik sãdhu Highest  level  of sãdhu.    A sãdhu who  has  attained  the 
ekãntik state. 
  
F  
Fãgan Ninth  month  of the Ãshãdhi Samvat year,  normally  falling 
between February and March. 
feto Long  piece  of  cloth  that  can  be  twisted  and  tied  around 
the head, or placed over the shoulder and tied around the 
waist. 
  
G  
gadã Mace.  One of Bhagvãn’s weapons. 
gajarã Strings of flowers tied around the forearm. 
gandh A  smell.    One  of  the panch-vishays.   Gandh is  the  physical 
element  of pruthvi,  and  is  perceived  by  the  nose.    The 
characteristics of gandh are fragrance and stench.   
gandharva A heavenly being engaged in music, song and dance in the 
loks of the devs. 
Ganesh The dev known as the remover of obstacles.  He is the son 
of Shiv and Pãrvati, and has the body of a human, and the 
head  of  an  elephant.    His pujã is  performed  before  any 
religious  ceremony  or  auspicious  occasion.    Also  called 
Ganpati and Vignavinãyak.  Ganesh writes the charitras of 
Bhagvãn. 
Garud An eagle.  The vehicle of Vishnu. 
gaupad A cow’s footprint.  A chihn on Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn’s 
left  foot.    Performing dhyãn on  this chihn causes  the  vast 
material world to become the size of a cow’s hoof. 
ghadi Duration   of   time   equalling   approximately   twenty-four 
minutes. 
ghee This  is  clarified  butter  or  pure  butter  that  is  formed  by 
heating it until the impurities in it settle to the bottom. 

Glossary 
- 816 - 
gnãn 1) Knowledge.  Spiritual knowledge leading to kalyãn.  In 
particular,  the  knowledge  of  the ãtmã,  and Bhagvãn’s 
svarup and His greatness.  One of the four attributes of 
ekãntik dharma. 
2) Also used to mean ãtmã-nishthã or ãtmã-gnãn. 
gnãni A person with gnãn.  One of the four types of bhaktas. 
gnãn-indriya Cognitive  sense,  through  which  a  person  can  ‘know'.  
There  are  five gnãn-indriyas:  hearing  (ears),  touch  (skin), 
sight (eyes), taste (tongue) and smell (nose).  They engage 
themselves   in   their   respective vishays and   have   the 
complete knowledge  of that vishay.  The sense organs are 
not  to  be  confused  with  the indriyas (the  senses).    The 
sense  organs  are  part  of  the  physical  body,  whereas  the 
indriyas (senses) are distinct from the physical body. 
gnãn-pralay Destruction  by gnãn.    A  state  of  individual  understanding 
in  which Prakruti-Purush and  the  entities  evolved  from 
them  do  not  come  into  view,  and  a  person  sees  only  pure 
chaitanya,   within   which   only   the murti of Bhagvãn 
resides,  but  no  other  forms  remain.    All mãyik influences 
are  destroyed – as  if ãtyantik-pralay has  taken  place  for 
that particular individual. 
gnãn-shakti The  power  of  understanding.    Aware  of  actions.    When  a 
jeev enters  the jãgrat state, Bhagvãn awakens  it  from 
unconsciousness  through  His gnãn-shakti and  makes  it 
aware of its actions. 
gnãn-yagna When  a bhakta of Bhagvãn engages  in antar-drashti,  it  is 
called   a gnãn-yagna.       Physical   activities   related    to 
Bhagvãn,    such    as    having    the darshan of Bhagvãn, 
performing  His pujã or  engaging  in kathã and kirtans of 
Bhagvãn, to see that murti of Bhagvãn within the heart, to 
perform  its pujã,  and  to  bow  before  it,  are  all forms  of 
antar-drashti, and are therefore aspects of a gnãn-yagna. 
Golok 1) The dhãm of Shree Krishna Bhagvãn.  
2) Also  means Akshardhãm.  The prefix ‘go’ means  light; 
therefore, meaning the ‘lok of light’ – Akshardhãm. 
Gopinãthji The murti of Shree   Krishna Bhagvãn.    Swãminãrãyan 
Bhagvãn installed   a murti of   Gopinãthji   Mahãrãj   in 
Gadhadã,  which  was  made  to  the  exact  size  of  Shreeji 

Glossary 
- 817 - 
Mahãrãj. 
gopi Protectors  of cows.    Wives  of the  cowherds  of Vrundãvan 
present during the time of Shree Krishna.  Female bhaktas 
of Bhagvãn who  represent  the  perfect  love  and bhakti 
towards Bhagvãn. 
gor Jaggery.  Sweet food made directly from sugarcane, and is 
yellow-brown in colour. 
gorakh-ãsan An ãsan to  protect  the indriyas.    Specific  yogic ãsan or 
sitting posture where a person sits with both heels tucked 
into the groin, the toes folded under the buttocks, and the 
large   toes   held   by   the   hands   from   behind   the   back.  
Considered to help in preventing the ejaculation of semen, 
and therefore helping in the observance of brahm-chãrya.  
Also known as goraksh-ãsan or bhadrãsan. 
grahastha Householder.    A  person  who  is  married.    A  person  who  is 
in the second stage of life, the grahastha ãshram. 
grahastha ãshram Second  of  the  four  stages  of  life,  when  a  person  enters 
married  life  to  fulfil  the  duties  of  a  householder.    At  the 
end   of grahastha ashram,   a   person   enters vãnprasth 
ãshram. 
grahn Nose.  Physical organ of smell (one of the indriyas). 
guchh Bunches  of  flowers,  usually  placed  above  the  ears  or  in 
the pãgh. 
gulãb Rose. 
guldãvadi Flower  of  the  chrysanthemum  genus,  found  to  blossom 
unusually out of season.  Also known as sevati. 
gun 
(pronounced goon) 
1) Good quality or trait.  
2) Principle  quality of Prakruti or Mãyã.   There are three 
in  total:   sattva-gun (goodness  and  awareness), rajo-
gun (passion  and  desires),  and tamo-gun (darkness, 
ignorance, and laziness).  All beings are affected by the 
influence of one or a combination of these three gun of 
Mãyã until  they  become gunãtit.  The gun bring  out 
different  types  of  moods  in  a  person:    a  person  in 
sattva-gun is  calm,  and  peaceful;  a  person  in rajo-gun 

Glossary 
- 818 - 
is  desirous,  and  enthusiastic;  a  person  in tamo-gun is 
volatile, lazy, and drowsy. 
gunãtit Beyond the three gun of Mãyã (sattva-gun, rajo-gun, tamo-
gun).  That which has no trace or influence of Mãyã. 
guru A teacher.  He will guide you on the path of kalyãn. 
gutko A small notebook. 
  
H  
hajãri Marigold. A large, yellow-orange flower. 
Hanumãnji A dev with  the svarup of  a  monkey.    He  is  courageous, 
brave, and a loyal bhakta of Shree Rãm. 
Hari An avatãr of Bhagvãn.    He  incarnated  in  His  four-armed 
svarup to   save   an   elephant   from   being   killed   by   a 
crocodile.  He cut off the crocodile’s head with His chakra. 
haribhakta A bhakta of Shree   Hari.      A bhakta of Swãminãrãyan 
Bhagvãn. 
harmo A  small  tree  which  blossoms  with  white  flowers,  found 
generally in the Kutch region of Gujarãt. 
Hayagriv An avatãr of Bhagvãn.    He  incarnated  in  the svarup of  a 
horse.   Brahmã had  become  tired  of  his  creative  duties, 
and he wanted to rest. As night was approaching, Brahmã 
yawned, which caused all the four Veds to come out  from 
his  opened  mouth.    A  demon   who  lived  near  him   in 
disguise,   abducted   the   Veds.    Bhagvãn took   birth   as 
Hayagriv to kill the demon and protect the Veds. 
hinsã Violence. 
Hiranyagarbh An avatãr of Bhagvãn.   
hruday-ãkãsh Space within the heart.  Spiritual region of the heart.  The 
inner self.  Place where the jeev resides. 
  
I  

Glossary 
- 819 - 
ichhã-shakti The power of free  will.  Whatever object is desired by the 
jeev, is acquired with the help of Bhagvãn’s ichhã-shakti. 
idã nãdi Nerve   or   channel   of   a   feminine   nature   transmitting 
physical  and  emotional  energy  within  the  inner  body  of  a 
person, where the current of energy flows downward and 
ends  on  the  left  side  of  the  body.    One  of  the  three  major 
nãdis:  the idã nãdi,  the pingalã nãdi,  and  the sushumnã 
nãdi. 
Indra The king of the devs.  He resides in Svarg-Lok. 
indriyas A sense, through which a person can ‘know’ and ‘perform 
actions’.  There are ten indriyas in  total - the  five gnãn-
indriyas (cognitive  senses)  and  the  five karma-indriyas 
(conative  senses),  with  the  mind  often  taken  to  be  the 
eleventh indriya.  They   engage   themselves   in   their 
respective vishays and  have  the  complete  knowledge  of 
that vishay.  The sense organs are not to be confused with 
the indriyas (the senses).  The sense organs are part of the 
physical  body,  whereas  the indriyas (senses)  are  distinct 
from the physical body.  
 five gnãn-indriyas:    hearing    (ears/shrotra),    touch 
(skin/tvak), sight (eyes/chakshu), taste 
(tongue/rasnã) and smell (grahn) 
 five karma-indriyas:    speech    (voice/vãk),    handling 
(hands/pãni), walking (feet/pãd), excretion 
(anus/pãyu) and procreation (genitals/upastha) 
irshyã Jealousy  of  a  quality  of  or  skill.    A  person  with irshyã 
cannot    tolerate    others    being    honoured    and    cannot 
tolerate  their  greatness;  and  they  act  to  harm  the  person 
they are jealous of. [Sãrangpur – 8]. 
ishta-dev The   preferred murti of Bhagvãn that   worshiped   by   a 
person.   Our ishta-dev is Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn;  but,  the 
ishta-dev of Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn was Shree Krishna. 
ishvar 1) Infinite  in  number.    Similar  to  the jeev with  respect  to 
being bound by Mãyã, but are involved in the creation, 
sustenance,  and  destructions  of  the brahmãnds,  and 
are   therefore   given   greater   powers   by Bhagvãn.  
Brahmã, Vishnu, Shiv and all entities greater than them 
upwards to Prakruti-Purush, are considered ishvars. 

Glossary 
- 820 - 
2) Second  of  the  five  eternal  entities – jeev, ishvar, Mãyã, 
Brahm, Parbrahm. 
Ishvar See Bhagvãn. 
  
J  
jad Lifeless.  Non-living.  Has no ãtmã.  Opposite of chaitanya.  
That which is without consciousness. 
jad prakruti 1) Eight    non-chaitanya (lifeless)    components    of   the 
world:    pruthvi, jal, tej, vãyu, ãkãsh, maha-tattva, 
Pradhãn-Prakruti and Mul-Prakruti.  
2) The  Bhagvad  Geetã  mentions  these  to  be pruthvi, jal, 
tej, vãyu, ãkãsh, man, buddhi and ahankãr.  [Loyã – 7]. 
jãgrat Awake.  One of the three mental states.  The jãgrat state is 
the result of the sustenance state of Virãt-Purush.  It is full 
of sattva-gun and  is  located  in  the  region  of  the  eyes.    In 
the jãgrat state,  the jeevãtmã is  known  as vishva,  and  is 
conscious of its sthul body. [Sãrangpur – 6]. 
Jain A  follower  of Jainism – the  non-Vedic  religion  of  India 
propagating  strict ahinsã, tyãg,  and karmas as  being  the 
only  factor  responsible  for  creation  and  the  continuing 
unfolding events and activities of the world.  According to 
Jain  philosophy, karmas themselves  can  grant  their  own 
rewards.  Therefore, Bhagvãn is  not  a  necessary  element 
of their philosophy. 
jal Water.    Liquid  matter.    One  of  the  five bhuts,  from  which 
the  physical  world  (Virãt-Purush)  is  formed.    It  binds 
pruthvi and  other  substances,  and  it  also  softens  and 
moistens all objects. It satisfies and sustains all life-forms, 
it quenches thirst, and suppresses heat. 
jal-basti Flushing   with   water.      A   strict   yogic   practice   to   help 
cleanse the inner parts of the body, which in turn helps in 
the  observance  of brahm-chãrya.    The  practice  involves 
standing   in   waist-high   water   and   drawing   in   water 
through the anus, swirling the water around the stomach, 
and  then  discharging  it  again  through  the  anus.    Another 
version of the practice involves drawing in water through 

Glossary 
- 821 - 
the  genitals  and  then  flushing  it  out  either  through  the 
genitals or the anus. 
jãmbu A  berry.    A chihn on Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn’s right  foot.  
Performing dhyãn on  this chihn ensures  that  a bhakta 
loses  interest  in  everything  else  and  feels  that  all worldly 
affairs are worthless. 
jãmo A  long-sleeved,  upper  garment  that  is  made  of  a  thick 
cloth,  with  rich  embroidery.  It  reaches  down  below  the 
knees, and is tied at the waist with long strings. 
jangam Mobile.    Animate.    Life-forms  such  as  humans, animals, 
and birds. 
Janmãshtami Birthday  of Shree  Krishna – Shrãvan vadi 8.    A  fast  if kept 
on this day, and it is celebrated with great festivity. 
jap  
(pronounced jup) 
Continuous   chanting   or   writing   of   the   holy   name   of 
Bhagvãn. 
jarãyuj Born from a womb.   The life-forms  born  from  wombs (all 
mammals, including humans). 
jav A barley grain.  A chihn on Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn’s right 
toe.  Performing dhyãn on  this chihn destroys  all  sins, 
purifies    the    mind,    and    grants    a    person    with    the 
knowledge   of ãtmã and Paramãtmã.      It   also   ensures 
enough worldly wealth and comforts. 
jeev 1) That  which  is  living.    Infinite  in  number.    Individual, 
embodied ãtmã still bound  by Mãyã and consequently 
undergoing  the  cycle  of  births  and  deaths.    The jeev is 
not  separate  the  three  bodies  (sthul, sukshma,  and 
kãran) and the three mental states (jãgrat, svapna, and 
sushupti),     whereas     the ãtmã is     distinct     from 
everything. 
2) First of the five eternal entities (jeev, ishvar, Mãyã, and 
Akshar, and Parbrahm). 
3) Sometimes used to mean the same as ãtmã.  
jeevãtmã 
See jeev. 
jhãnjh Pair  of  small,  cymbals – slightly  larger  than manjirãs - 
used     in     the     accompaniment     of     other     percussion 

Glossary 
- 822 - 
instruments. 
jignãsu A person who seeks knowledge of the ãtmã (ãtmã-nisthã).  
One of the four types of bhaktas. 
Jyeshth The  twelfth  month  of  the Ãshãdhi Samvat year,  normally 
falling between May and June. 
  
K  
kailãs The place where Shiv resides and performs tap. 
kaivalyãrthi A   person   who   worships   only Bhagvãn in   order   to 
experience  the ãtmã.    He  is  of  an  intermediate  level.  
[Ashlãli – 1] 
kãl  Time.  The continuous phenomenon of the  progression  of 
existence  and  events.    It  allows  for  the  past,  present  and 
future,   and   ultimately   leads   to   the   destruction   of   all 
things.  [Loyã – 9]. 
Kãl Cause   of   death.      A dev that   remains   in   the ãgnã of 
Bhagvãn, but carries out his duties of his own free will.  If 
Bhagvãn wishes, He may interfere with Kãl’s  duties.  
kalash A  brass  water-pot.    A chihn on Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn’s 
left  foot.    By performing dhyãn on  this chihn a bhakta 
attains total fulfilment and becomes akshar-rup.   A kalash 
occupies the highest point on the shikhar of a mandir, and 
so the bhakta attains the highest dhãm, Akshardhãm. 
Kali-Yug Age of Darkness.  Fourth and present of the four ages that 
mark the time-scale of the world.  Kali-Yug began in 3102 
BCE,  after  Shree  Krishna Bhagvãn left  the  earth.    It  lasts 
for 432,000 human years, of which over 5,000 years have 
already  passed.    The  current Kali-Yug is  estimated  to  end 
in  the  year  428,889  CE.   Kali-Yug is  when  purity  and 
righteousness have  thoroughly diminished  in comparison 
to  what  they  were  in Satya-Yug.    People  generally  live  to 
be  not  more  than  a  hundred,  and svabhãvs prevail  in 
greater abundance than ever before. 
Kalki An avatãr of Bhagvãn that  is  still  yet  to  appear  on  earth.  
Bhagvãn will  incarnate  in  the svarup of  a  destroyer who 

Glossary 
- 823 - 
will  come  riding  on  his   white  horse   with  his  blazing 
sword  in  his  hand.  He  will  take  birth  towards  the  end  of 
this Kali-Yug.  Kalki will punish and kill the evil sinners of 
the world.  The universe will then be destroyed. 
kalp-vruksh A  special  tree  possessing  the  magical  power  to  fulfil  the 
wishes  of  anyone  who  sits  under  it.    It  is  one  of  the 
fourteen  divine  objects  that  emerged  from  the samudra 
manthan.  The kalp-vruksh lives  for  one kalp (4,32  x  10
9
 
years). 
kalyãn 1) Liberation.    Freedom  from  the  cycle  of  births  and 
deaths. 
2) To take birth as a higher life-form, or to take birth in a 
higher lok. 
kalyãn-kãri Liberating.    The  cause  of kalyãn.    The  cause  of moksh.  
That  which  causes  a jeev to  break  free  from  the  cycle  of 
births and deaths. 
kãm 1) Lust.  Passion.  Desire.  [Gadhadã I – 73] 
2) One of the four purushãrths, allowing for the fulfilment 
of a person's personal and social desires. 
kamal A  lotus.    A chihn on Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn’s right  foot.  
Performing dhyãn on   this chihn enables   a bhakta to 
remain free of material attachments and focus his mind at 
the  feet  of Bhagvãn.    Just  as  a kamal is  able  to  blossom 
even in muddy water, similarly, a bhakta is able to remain 
free   of   material attachments,   despite   fulfilling   all   his 
worldly  duties  obligations.    Just  as  a kamal does  not  sink 
into  water,  a bhakta is  not  submerged  by  the  forces  of 
inner enemies, attachments, and material pleasures. 
kamandalu A wooden water pot, with a handle. 
Kãm-Dev The dev of lust and passion. 
Kanbi A   class   of   people   of   the Vaishya varna traditionally 
engaged in farming and rearing cattle. 
kanishth Lowest. 
kanthi Double-threaded  necklace;  usually  made  of tulsi beads, 
received by satsangis upon initiation into the 

Glossary 
- 824 - 
Swãminãrãyan  Sampradãy,  and  worn  as  a  sign  of  their 
connection to Bhagvãn.  
kapat Deceit.  To deceive someone by showing false actions and 
behaviour. 
Kapil Geetã A  portion  of  the Shreemad  Bhãgvat consisting  of Kapil-
Dev's teachings to His mother, Devhuti. 
Kapil-Dev An avatãr of Bhagvãn.    He  incarnated  in  the svarup of  a 
rushi to  compile  all  the  divine  knowledge  that  had  been 
destroyed.    He   gave   the   knowledge   of   the   Sãnkhya 
philosophy   to   his   mother   Devhuti,   which   was   later 
written in the Shreemad Bhãgvat by Vyãsji. 
kãran Fundamental.  One of the three bodies of the jeev.  It is the 
fundamental  body,  consisting  of  the jeev's desires,  which 
causes  the jeev to  take  birth  again.    The kãran body  itself 
is  ignorance  that  has  been  fused  with  the jeev.    It  retains 
the jeev's sanchit karmas and is the cause of the sthul and 
sukshma bodies just as a seed is the cause of a tree. 
karma Action.  Deed.  Any thought, word, or deed that will sooner 
or  later  reap  its  consequences.   Karmas of  a  person  are 
linked to their rewards (cause and effect).  Bhagvãn is the 
giver  of  the  rewards  of  the karmas;  good  deeds  reap 
pleasant   rewards,   and   bad   deeds   reap   painful   fruits.  
Karmas remain   with   a jeev until   it   has   received   its 
rewards.  
 
There  are  three  types  of karmas:   sanchit  karmas (deeds 
accumulated   over   infinite   births), prãrabdha   karmas 
(deeds  whose  consequences  are  already  set  in  motion) 
and kriyamãn  karmas (deeds  whose  consequences  are  in 
the process of being formed). 
karma-indriya Conative   sense,   through   which   a   person   can   perform 
actions.    The  organ  that  is  the  physical  aspect  of  a  sense.  
There  are  five karma-indriyas:    speech  (voice),  handling 
(hands),  walking  (feet),  excretion  (anus)  and  procreation 
(genitals).    They  engage  themselves  in  their  respective 
vishays and  have  the  complete  knowledge  of  that vishay.  
The sense organs are not to be confused with the indriyas 
(the  senses).    The  sense  organs  are  part  of  the  physical 

Glossary 
- 825 - 
body,  whereas  the indriyas (senses)  are  distinct  from  the 
physical body. 
karma-yogi A    person    is    striving    for    karma-yog    (yog    through 
activities).  Term used for a grahastha bhakta who has not 
renounced    his/her    worldly    duties    completely – as 
opposed  to  a sãnkhya-yogi – but  is  nevertheless  sincerely 
striving for yog or kalyãn.    Refers to the many grahasthas 
in   the   time   of Swãminãrãyan   Bhagvãn who   chose   to 
totally commit and dedicate their lives to satsang. 
karnikãr A  red  or  yellow  scented  oleander  flower  called Thevetia 
neiifolia.  The  yellow karnikãr are  single  flowers  about 
5cm  in  length,  whereas  the  red karnikãr are  clustered  on 
one   flower   stalk.       The karnikãr mentioned   in   the 
Vachanãmrut refers to the red karnikãr. 
Kãrtik Fifth  month  of  the Ãshãdhi Samvat year,  normally  falling 
between October and November. 
kartum The all-doer.  Bhagvãn does everything and is the cause of 
everything.  
kathã Religious talks and discussions.  
Kãyasth Community  of  people  or  a  person  born  of brãhman and 
kshatriya parents, traditionally engaged in political affairs. 
kediyu A long-sleeved, upper garment that is pleated at the chest, 
and reaches down to the waist. Approximately twelve feet 
of cloth is used up in the pleats. 
keval-gnãn Perfect   or   ultimate gnãn,   as   described   in   the nãstik 
philosophy.  The final state of realisation. 
khand Continent.  Large land mass or region. 
khes Piece  of  cloth  that  can  be  worn  as  a  shawl  to  cover  the 
upper body, or worn as a dhoti to cover the lower body. 
khir Rich   item   of   food   made   of   sweetened   milk   and   rice, 
garnished   with   aromatic   spices   and   nuts,   and   usually 
served hot. 
kinkhãb Fine  silken fabric  brocaded  with  golden  or  silver  threads, 
originally made only in Egypt. 

Glossary 
- 826 - 
kirtan Divine  songs  about Bhagvãn and  His charitras,  usually 
sung to the accompaniment of musical instruments. 
kodrã Low  quality  of  grain  lacking  in  nutrition.    Similar  in  size 
and  shape  to  mustard  seeds,  but  white  in  colour.    Stored 
in   times   of   famine   because   of   its   resilience   against 
extreme weather conditions and time, but generally eaten 
only by the poor. 
Krishna 1) An avatãr of Bhagvãn.  He incarnated in the svarup of a 
cowherd.    This  is  considered  to  be  a  greater avatãr 
than  the  others,  as  Shree  Krishna  possessed  all  of  the 
powers  of Bhagvãn,  whereas  other avatãrs possessed 
less  power.   Shree  Krishna  conveyed  the  message  of 
love  and  humanity  to  the  world.    Also,  He recited  the 
epic  poem,  the  Bhagvad  Geetã,  to  Arjun  in  which  He 
stated:    ‘Whenever dharma declines   and adharma 
increases,  I  shall  incarnate  myself  as  a  human  to  save 
the   holy,   to   destroy   the   sin   of   the   sinner,   and   to 
establish dharma.  I come into being from yug to yug’. 
2) In  the  Vachanãmrut,  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  also  uses  the 
name  “Shree Krishna”  to  describe Bhagvãn 
Purushottam Nãrãyan. 
kriyã Deed.  Action. 
kriyamãn karma Deeds  whose  consequences  are  in  the  process  of  being 
formed.   Current  deeds - including  words  and  thoughts - 
which  will  eventually  be  added  to  the  stock  of karmas 
(sanchit karmas)  until  they  'ripen'  to  give  rewards  as 
prãrabdha karmas,  either  later  in  the  present  life  or  in  a 
future life. 
kriyã-shakti The power of application.   Whatever action a jeev engages 
in,  it  does  so   with  the  support  of  what  is  known  as 
Bhagvãn’s kriyã-shakti. 
krodh Anger.  [Loyã – 1] 
kruchhra 
chãndrãyan 
Form of strictness which involves regulating the intake of 
food over prolonged periods of time, generally performed 
as a form of prãyshchit for a grave sin. 
kruchrãti kruchhra Form   of   harsh tap which   involves   a   twelve-day vrat: 
drinking water once daily for the first nine days, followed 

Glossary 
- 827 - 
by three days of complete fasting. 
krutaghni An ungrateful and selfish person.  [Gadhadã I – 10] 
kshatriya Person  of  power  and  courage,  traditionally  responsible 
for  the  formation  and  enforcement  of  law  within  society, 
as  well  as  its  safety.    Rulers  and  warriors  of  society.    The 
second  of  the  four varnas (castes)  of  the  ancient  Indian 
social system. 
kshetra 1) Field.  Territory.  Place of dwelling.  
2) Often  used  with kshetragna to  describe  a  relationship 
similar to that between some land and its owner – the 
kshetra is the land, and the kshetragna its owner. 
kshetragna Knower  of kshetra. Often  used  with kshetra to describe  a 
relationship  similar  to  that  between  a  landowner  and  his 
land – kshetragna is the owner,  and  the kshetra is  the 
land. Used    to    describe    the ãtmã as    the    master 
(kshetragna)  of  the  three  bodies  (kshetra). Also  used  to 
describe Bhagvãn as  the  master  (kshetragna)  of  all jeevs, 
ishvars, and Brahm (kshetra). [Panchãlã – 3]. 
Kuber A dev who is the personal accountant of the other devs. 
kudã-panthi Follower  of a  cult  whose  beliefs  are  against  the  teachings 
of the Veds.  They falsely state the five 'M’ as a means to 
kalyãn.    They  are:    madya  (alcohol),  mãns  (meat),  matsya 
(fish), mudrã (occult markings on the body), and maithun 
(illicit sex).  One of the four types of kusangis. 
kum-kum A  fine,  red  powder – traditionally  made  of  saffron – used 
by   Hindus   during   worship.      It   is   also   applied   to   the 
forehead to form a chãndlo. 
kunjar-kriyã Elephant  act.    A  strict yogic practice  to  help  cleanse  the 
inner  parts  of  the  body - which  in  turn  helps  in  the 
observance   of brahm-chãrya.      The   practice   involves 
drinking   a   considerable   amount   of   water,   swirling   it 
around  the  stomach,  and  then  discharging  it  out  again 
through the mouth. 
Kurma An avatãr of Bhagvãn.    He  incarnated  in  the svarup of  a 
turtle.    During  the samudra  manthan (churning  of  the 
ocean),  the  Mount Mandarãnchal that  was  used  to  churn 

Glossary 
- 828 - 
the ocean, began to sink into the soft ocean bed.  Bhagvãn 
assumed  the avatãr of  a  turtle,  and  went  into  the  ocean 
where  His  shell  was  used  as  a  pivot  to  churn  the  ocean 
with the mountain. 
kusang The association of an evil person. 
kusangi A  person  who  is  bad  company.    A kusangi has  a  bad 
influence on someone’s progress in satsang,  and  leads 
them   astray   from satsang.      There   are   four   types   of 
kusangis:  shakti-panthi, kudã-panthi, shushka-vedãnti, and 
nãstik. 
  
L  
lãdu Sweet item of food made principally of flour, ghee, and gor 
or sugar, shaped into small balls. 
Lakshmi A devi (goddess) who is the  wife of Vishnu.  She is the devi 
of   wealth.   Therefore,   money   and   gold   is   also   called 
Lakshmi. She eternally remains in the sevã of Bhagvãn. 
Lakshmi-Nãrãyan The murti of Lakshmi and Vãsudev-Nãrãyan. 
lav Duration   of   time   equalling   approximately 
1
/
150
 of   a 
second, or 
1
/
16
 of the time taken to blink. 
leelã A divine action performed by Bhagvãn. 
lobh Greed.  Craving for wealth. 
lok Place.  Region.  World. 
  
M  
mad Arrogance. 
Mãdhvi Sampradãy A sampradãy that   follows   the   philosophy   of   Mãdhvã-
Ãchãrya,  a  13th  century  South  Indian  Vaishnav ãchãrya.  
He  proposed  a  principle  that  states  there  is  an  essential 
and  eternal  distinction  between Bhagvãn and  all  other 
beings. 

Glossary 
- 829 - 
madhyã 1) Intermediate.  Medium. 
2) Used  to  describe  the gopis.    The madhyã gopis would 
never  become  angry  with Bhagvãn and  would  never 
speak    harsh    words.        However,    by    using    their 
shrewdness,   they   would   use   cunning   methods   to 
conceal their selfishness from others and do whatever 
they   pleased while   also   doing   whatever   pleased 
Bhagvãn.     Therefore,  they  would   not  do   only  that 
which pleased Bhagvãn. [Sãrangpur – 15] 
madhyam Medium.  Intermediate. 
madhyamã When  the  ‘parã’ speech   reached   the   throat   of Virãt-
Purush, it became known by the name of ‘madhyamã’. 
Mãgdhi Dialect   specific    to   Magadh,    the    southern    region    of 
present-day  Bihãr.    It  is  the  language  of  the  ancient  Jain 
and Buddhist shãstras. 
Mãgshar Sixth  month  of  the Ãshãdhi Samvat year,  normally  falling 
between November and December. 
Mahã Eighth month of the Ãshãdhi Samvat year, normally falling 
between January and February. 
Mahãbhãrat The  great  epic  of  India.    A shãstra revolving  around  the 
family  feud  between  the  Pãndavs  and  the  Kauravs,  which 
ends in a great battle.   With over 100,000 verses, it is the 
world's longest poem. 
mahã-bhuts Major  elements.    Collective  term  for  the  five  physical 
elements that evolve from tãmas-ahankãr and from which 
the physical world is formed.  They are:  pruthvi (earth or 
solid  matter), jal (water  or  liquid matter), tej (light  or 
energy), vãyu (air or gaseous matter), and ãkãsh (space or 
vacuum).    Each  one  has  a  root  cause,  called  its tanmãtrãs 
or vishay: smells, tastes, sights, touch, and sounds. 
Mahã-Mãyã See Prakruti. 
Mahã-Purush 1) Also called Mul-Purush, Akshar-Purush, and Purush. 
2) The svarup of Bhagvãn that  resides  in Shvet-Dvip,  and 
gives darshan to the niranna-muktas. 
maha-tattva Major  element.    Equivalent  to  the chitt of  the jeev,  but  on 

Glossary 
- 830 - 
an   immense   level.      First   of   the   entities   produced   by 
Pradhãn-Purush.      The  entire  world  resides  within  it  in  a 
subtle  form.  It  is  itself  unchanging,  luminous,  pure,  and 
full of pure sattva-gun.  [Gadhadã I – 12]. 
Mahã-Yug The  time  of  four yugs (Satya-Yug, Tretã-Yug, Dvãpar-Yug, 
and Kali-Yug). Also called chokadi. 
mãlã A rosary made of 108 beads, which is usually made of tulsi 
or  sandalwood.    The mãlã is  turned  with  the  right  hand, 
by placing it over the middle finger and moving each bead 
one by one with the thumb, while reciting 
“Swãminãrãyan”. 
malãr A  musical rãg of  Indian  music.    Considered  to  induce 
rainfalls if sung correctly. 
man  
(pronounced mun) 
Mind.    One  of  the  four antah-karans,  with  the  function  of 
generating  thoughts  and  desires,  and  governing  all  of  the 
indriyas. 
mãn Pride.        When    a    person    wants someone    else    to 
acknowledge them as superior. 
manan To think about.   Contemplation.  To mentally think over a 
talk, and to discard parts of the talk which are not needed 
and to retain the parts of the talk which are useful.  
mandal Group   or   assembly.      In   the   time   of Swãminãrãyan 
Bhagvãn,   the sãdhus were   often   formed   into   groups, 
within  which  they  travelled  and  preached  in  different 
regions. 
mandir Temple.  Sacred Hindu place of worship. 
manjirã Pair of small, cymbals used in the accompaniment of other 
percussion instruments. 
manomay chakra The  mind  in  the  form  of  a  wheel.    The  mind,  seen  as  a 
constantly  turning  wheel,  whose  ten  spikes  are  taken  to 
be the ten indriyas.  [Sãrangpur – 7]. 
manovahã nãdi  Nerve  or  channel  in  which  the  mind  resides,  transmitting 
energy within the inner body of a person and allowing the 
flow of desires and thoughts. 

Glossary 
- 831 - 
mãnsi pujã Mental  worship.    Form  of  worship  in  which  a  person 
devoutly  performs pujã of Bhagvãn mentally - exactly  as 
he would physically. 
mantra 1) A repeated word or phrase. 
2) A    sacred    verbal    phrase    repeated    in    prayer,    or 
meditation, such as ‘Swãminãrãyan’.  Wicked people 
use mantras to cast evil curses. 
Manu Manu is  responsible  for  overseeing  the  first  stages  of  all 
life forms in the new cycle of creation and he lives for the 
entire  cycle.   Manu and  his  wife  become  the  first  parents 
for  each  cycle  (Adam  and  Eve).    In  one  day  of Brahmã, 
fourteen Manus reign and die.  The duration of the reign of 
one Manu is  306,720,000  human  years,  and  is  called  a 
manvantar.  Fourteen Manus are  created  and  destroyed 
during one day of Brahmã. 
manvantar The  duration  of  the  reign  of  one  of  the  fourteen Manus 
that   reign   sequentially   during    one   day   of Brahmã.  
Duration of time equalling 306,720,000 human years. 
Mãrgi A  Follower  of  the  Vãm-Mãrg  (cult  of  lust),  an  anti-Vedic 
cult   that   promotes    illicit   sex   and   other    prohibited 
practices as a means to kalyãn. 
matsar Jealousy of objects.  Jealousy that arises in a person when 
someone  else  has  a  better  object  or  item  than  himself.  
[Kãriyãni – 6]. 
Matsya An avatãr of Bhagvãn.    He  incarnated  in  the svarup of  a 
fish when   a   flood   destroyed   the   world.      He   saved 
humanity   by   saving Satyavrat   from   the   great   flood.  
Satyavrat  became  the  first  human  in  the  new  world,  and 
became known as Manu.  He also saved the Veds text from 
the flood.  As Manu was lonely, he prayed for children, and 
was  granted  a  wife.   Manu and  his  wife  become  the  first 
parents   for   each   cycle   (Adam   and   Eve).    Manu is 
responsible for overseeing the first stages of all life forms 
in  the  new  cycle  of  creation  and  he  lives  for  the  entire 
cycle. 
Matsya A  fish.    A chihn on Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn’s left  foot.  
Performing dhyãn on  this chihn grants  a bhakta with  a 
stable mind.  It also empowers him to live life absorbed in 

Glossary 
- 832 - 
the murti of Bhagvãn. 
mãyã That which obstructs a bhakta from focusing on Bhagvãn.  
[Gadhadã I – 1]. 
Mãyã 1) Power    of Bhagvãn used    as    the    fundamental 
'substance'  of  creation.    It  is  composed  of  the  three 
gun,  is  both jad and chaitanya, eternal, nirvishesh, 
and in its dormant state (before the time of creation) 
– it houses all jeevs and ishvars, and all the tattvas.  It 
is   inspired   by,   controlled   by,   and   dependent   on 
Bhagvãn.    The jeevs and ishvars must  go  beyond 
Mãyã (eradicate  it  within  themselves)  in  order  to 
attain Akshardhãm.      Everything   in   the   world   is 
produced  from  the  products  of Mãyã.    Also  called 
Prakruti. 
2) Third  of  the  five  eternal  entities  (jeev, ishvar, Mãyã, 
and Brahm, and Parbrahm). 
mãyik That  which  is  composed  of  the  products  of Mãyã.    False.  
Worldly.  That which is destroyed. 
medi A small room above a house or a mansion. 
mogrã A  flower  of the  jasmine  genus  called Jasminum  sambac or 
Arabian  jasmine.    It  has  a  white  colour  and  extremely 
sweet fragrance.  Traditionally used in offerings to murtis 
of Bhagvãn. 
moh Infatuation.  Attraction. 
Mohini An avatãr of Bhagvãn.    He  incarnated  in  the svarup of  a 
beautiful  lady.    After  the devs and  demons  had  churned 
the  oceans  to  extract  the  nectar  that  would  give  them 
immortality,  there  was  a  fight  over  the  possession  of  the 
urn.   Bhagvãn realised  that  if the  argument  continued for 
long  then  the  nectar  would  spill  out  and  be  lost  forever.  
He  also  did  not  want  the  demons  to  drink  any  of  the 
nectar.  So, He appeared as Mohini, a lady of great beauty.  
Both  the devs and  the  demons  stopped  fighting  and  were 
attracted  to  Her  beauty.  Flaunting  Her  charms,  Mohini 
convinced  both  the devs and  the  demons  that  she  would 
distribute the nectar.  
moksh Liberation.    Salvation.    Breaking  free  from  the  cycle  of 

Glossary 
- 833 - 
births and deaths.  To attain Akshardhãm. 
Moksh-Dharma A   portion   of   the   Mahãbhãrat consisting   of   Bhishma's 
teachings  from  his  bed  of arrows  to  Yudhishthir  after  the 
end of the Mahãbhãrat war. 
moliyu Rich  fabric  with  silky  finish  woven  with  golden  or  silver 
threads and detailed, decorative edges. 
mrudang Type     of     double-sided     drum.          Indian     percussion 
instrument  played  to  supply  rhythm  in  the  singing  of 
kirtans. 
mugdhã 1) Lowest. 
2) Used  to  describe  the gopis.    The mugdhã gopis would 
often  lecture Bhagvãn and  say, ‘We have gone out of 
our  way  doing  things  for  you,  yet  you  do  not  take  even 
the slightest notice of us’.  Furthermore,  if  they  were 
teased further, they would be upset with Bhagvãn, and 
speak such harsh words that a person  would feel they 
will soon fall from the path of Bhagvãn. 
mukta Free.  Released.  A liberated soul.  A resident of any dhãm 
of Bhagvãn who has been freed from life in the lower loks 
to  a  more  spiritually  elevated  state.    There  are  varying 
levels of muktas:  the muktas of Badrikãshram, Shvet-Dvip, 
Vaikunth,  and Golok.    The  highest  level  of mukta, akshar-
mukta,  has  attained  ultimate kalyãn and  is  free  from  the 
bondage  of Mãyã and  the  cycle  of  births  and  deaths.  
[Sãrangpur – 17]. 
mukti To  become  free.   Kalyãn.   Moksh.   Those  who  are bhaktas 
of Bhagvãn do  not  desire  any  of  the  four  types  of mukti:  
to reside in the dhãm of Bhagvãn; to stay near Bhagvãn; to 
assume a svarup similar to Bhagvãn; and to attain powers 
similar  to Bhagvãn.    A nishkãm bhakta of Bhagvãn does 
not  wish  for  any  of  these.    Instead,  he  only  wishes  for 
Bhagvãn’s sevã.  [Gadhadã I – 43]. 
Mul-Prakruti See Prakruti. 
Mul-Prakruti-
Purush 
See Prakruti-Purush. 
Mul-Purush See Purush. 

Glossary 
- 834 - 
mumukshu A person in search of moksh. 
muni Sãdhu. 
muni-mandal Group or assembly of munis. 
murti 1) Sacred  idol  of Bhagvãn used  to  offer  worship.    There 
are  eight  types  of murtis that  can  be   worshipped:  
stone,  wood,  metal,  earth,  engraved  or  drawn,  sand, 
gems, and mental. 
2) The form of Bhagvãn. 
  
N  
nãdi Nerve  or  channel  transmitting  energy  within  the  inner 
bodies   of   a   person   and   interconnecting   the chakras.  
There are said to be 72,000 nãdis in all, of which three are 
major:    the idã nãdi,  the pingalã nãdi,  and  the sushumnã 
nãdi. 
Naimishãranya 
Kshetra 
1) Wherever the jagged edges of the manomay chakra are 
worn  away.  A  person  should  understand  the  mind  to 
be  the manomay chakra,  and  the  ten indriyas to  be  its 
jagged  edges.    Wherever  those  jagged  edges  of  the 
mind (the indriyas) wear away and become blunt, that 
place   should   be   known   as Naimishãranya Kshetra.  
Religious   deeds   (jap, tap, vrat, dhyãn,   and pujã) 
commenced  in  that  place  flourish  rapidly,  day  by  day.  
Naimishãranya Kshetra should    be    known    to    be 
wherever Bhagvãn’s ekãntik sant resides. 
2) A tirth in India. 
naishtik  
brahm-chãri 
A  person  who  follows  the  eight  types  of brahm-chãrya, 
which  prevent  them  from  associating  with  the  opposite 
gender in the following ways: 
 shravanam - listening to or of 
 keertanam - talking to or of 
 keli - frolicking with 
 prekshanam - intentionally looking at 
 guhyabhãshanam - privately conversing with 
 sankalp - fantasising about 
 adhyavasãya - thinking of 
 kriyã - intercourse with 

Glossary 
- 835 - 
Nandishvar A white bull.  The vehicle of Shiv. 
napunsak Impotent.  Infertile.  Unable to procreate. 
Nãrad An avatãr of Bhagvãn.    He  incarnated  in  the svarup of  a 
travelling rushi.  Nãrad showed that bhakti is the best way 
of attaining moksh.  He was also a great bhakta of Bhagvãn 
and  has  guided  many  souls  on  the  path  of kalyãn by 
travelling all over the brahmãnd. 
Narak Where nãstiks and  sinners  are  sent  after  death  to  suffer 
for  their  sins  at  the  hands  of Yam-Rãj and  the yamduts.  
After suffering for their sins, these jeevs continue to go on 
the cycle of births and deaths.  Also called Yampuri.  
Nãrãyan The four-armed svarup of Bhagvãn. See Bhagvãn. 
Nãrãyan-Muni One  of  the  names  given  to  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  by  Rãmãnand 
Swãmi  at  the  time  of  His  initiation  as  the  head  of  the 
sampradãy.      The   other   name   given   was   Sahajãnand 
Swãmi. 
Nar-Nãrãyan An avatãr of Bhagvãn.  He incarnated in the svarup of twin 
brothers  to  kill  a  demon  named  Kunchi.   Nar incarnated 
as  Arjun,  and Nãrãyan incarnated  as Shree  Krishna.   Nar-
Nãrãyan Bhagvãn forever  performs tap in Badrikãshram 
for His bhaktas. 
nãstik 1) Atheist.    Non-believer.    Opposite  of ãstik.    Person  who 
does not believe in the existence of Bhagvãn, or who is 
not religious.  One of the four types of kusangis. 
2) Often refers specifically to the Jains, who propose that 
all  activities  and  events  are direct  results  of karmas, 
but  who  do  not  accept Bhagvãn as  the  all-doer  or  the 
giver of the rewards of karmas. 
3) A   person   who   states   that   the vidhi and nishedh 
prescribed by the shãstras are false. 
4) Can also describe people or shãstras that do not accept 
the authority and authenticity of the Veds, or a person 
who does not trust the  words of greats such as Nãrad, 
the Sanakãdik, Vyãs, and Vãlmiki. 
neti neti Indescribable.  Incomprehensible.  Beyond words. 
nididhyãs Constant   thinking   and   concentration.      Repeated   deep 

Glossary 
- 836 - 
thoughts.      After   having   mentally   retained   a   talk   with 
nishchay,  the  practice  of  continuously  recalling  the  talk 
day and night. 
nimish Blink.    Duration  of  time  equalling  approximately 
2
/
5
 of  a 
second.  The time taken to blink. 
nimit-pralay 1) Stimulated  dissolution.    Destruction  of  the  lower  ten 
loks of  the  fourteen  loks  of  a brahmãnd,  including 
Svarg-Lok,  Mrutyu-Lok  and  Pãtãl.    This  is  stimulated 
by  the  end  of  the  fourteen-manvantar day  of Virãt-
Purush, when his equally long night falls. 
2) Brahmã’s state  of sushupti (deep  sleep) – when  all  of 
ishvar’s responsibilities  are  absorbed – which  lasts  as 
long as his day.  Equivalent to 4.32 x 10
9
 human years. 
nindrã Sleep. 
nirãkãr Formless.  No svarup. 
niranjan Describes  a  person  whose  eyes  are  not  affected  by mãyã 
in the form of attractive objects. 
niranna-mukta A ‘food-less’ mukta.    The muktas of Shvet-Dvip are called 
niranna-muktas,  as  they  do  not  consume  water  (nir)  or 
food  (ann).    Also,  they  are  free  from  the shad-urmi (six 
physical  and  emotional  feelings).  The muktas that  reside 
in  this dhãm are ãtmãs who  have  been  freed  from  the 
cycle  of  births  and  deaths,  but  have   not  yet  attained 
Akshardhãm.  So, they perform continuous tap, in order to 
attain ultimate moksh. 
nirãvaran drashti The ability to see everywhere, like a siddh or yogi. 
nirbij Seedless.   Without the association of Bhagvãn. 
nirgun 1) Without gun.  Not possessing any qualities of the three 
guns of Mãyã – sattva-gun, rajo-gun,  and tamo-gun.  
Beyond all mãyik qualities.  Divine.  
2) Extremely subtle.  [Kãriyãni – 8]. 
nirlobhi Without greed. 
nirmãni Without pride. 
nirvikalp Without  alternatives  or  doubts.    Used  to  describe  faith  or 

Glossary 
- 837 - 
state in which a person sees only Bhagvãn – no doubts or 
distinctions remain whatsoever.  [Gadhadã I – 39]. 
nirvikalp samãdhi 1) Highest  state  of  realisation,  in  which  a  person  sees 
only Bhagvãn – no   doubts   or   distinctions   remain.  
[Gadhadã I – 39]. 
2) The eighth and final stage of ashtãng-yog. 
nirvishesh Description  of  that  which  is  without  any  responsibilities.  
This   describes Mãyã in   her   causal   state   when   she   is 
without  all  of  the  things  that  may  develop  from  her  (the 
twenty-four tattvas). 
nishchay Unfaltering  faith  in Bhagvãn,  no  matter  what is  seen  or 
heard. 
nishedh The “don’ts”. That which morally should not be done (in 
contrast to vidhi). 
nishkãm bhakta Superficially  appears  to  be  a sakãm bhakta,  but  inwardly, 
that bhakta has  perfect nishchay and  wishes  for  nothing 
except  the murti of Bhagvãn.    If  inner  enemies  cause 
disturbances  within,  or  a  desire  for  pleasures  other  than 
the murti of Bhagvãn arises, he feels intense guilt.  Even if 
he has only a slight amount of ãtmã-nishthã and vairãgya, 
such  a bhakta still  attains  profound  bliss  in the dhãm of 
Bhagvãn after leaving his body. 
nishkãmi Without lust. 
nishthã Belief. 
nisnehi Without affection. 
nispruhi Without desire for worldly objects. 
nisvãd No desire for tasty foods. 
nitya-pralay 1) Constant    destruction.        The    day-to-day    dying    of 
countless  individual devs,  demons,  humans  and  other 
beings. 
2) The jeev’s state of sushupti (deep  sleep) – when  all  of 
jeev’s responsibilities are absorbed. 
nivrutti 1) Inactivity.        State    of    quietness    and    obedience.  
Retirement   from   social   duties   and   affairs.      In   this 

Glossary 
- 838 - 
sense, often used to refer to the path of tyãg.  
2) Can also include retirement from all forms of activities 
and responsibilities, including religious activities, such 
as sevã in  the mandir,  and  attending  to bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn.  A person increases dhyãn and smaran at the 
expense of bhakti and sevã. 
niyam 1) Moral  and  spiritual  disciplines  and  religious  codes  of 
conduct  prescribed   by Bhagvãn or  the shãstras, to 
protect a bhakta on the path to Bhagvãn.  Niyams may 
relate  to  either dharma or bhakti.   Niyams keep  the 
bhakta fit  to  travel  closer  to Bhagvãn and  ultimately 
earn  the  grace  of Bhagvãn.    Disobeying niyams causes 
the bhakta to  fall  from  the  path  of Bhagvãn.    Basic 
niyams for bhaktas are outlined in the Shikshãpatri. 
2) The  second  step  of ashtãng-yog,  which  involves  the 
observance  of  religious  practices  and  code  of dharma 
for the control and refinement of the mind. 
Nrusinh An avatãr of Bhagvãn.    He  incarnated  in  the svarup of  a 
lion-man.        Hiranyakashipu    was    a    demon    who   had 
immunity  from  being  killed  by  man,  beast,  and Bhagvãn.  
For,  this  reason, Bhagvãn took  birth  as  half-lion  and  half-
man.    He  killed  Hiranyakashipu,  and  saved  His  devout 
bhakta, Prahlãd. 
  
P  
pachhedi A thin shawl. 
pãd Feet.  Physical organ of walking (one of the indriyas). 
pãdma Lotus.  The chihn of a lotus on the palm is called a padma.  
Also, a lotus held in the hand is called a padma. 
pãdma-kalp Period   of   time   during   the   process   of   creation   when 
Marichi   and   others jeevs   are   given   their   bodies   by 
Bhagvãn.    Length  of pãdma-kalp time  is  one  of Brahmã's 
days (4.32 x 10
9
 human years).  [Gadhadã – 13]. 
pãgh Turban. Long, thin piece of cloth tied around the head. 
pakhvãj Type    of mrudang or    double-sided    drum.        Indian 

Glossary 
- 839 - 
percussion instrument with a deep, mellow sound, played 
to supply rhythm in the singing of kirtans. 
paksh To  be  in  favour  of  someone.    Loyalty.    We  must  always 
take the paksh of Bhagvãn and His bhaktas. 
pal Duration of time equalling approximately 24 seconds. 
pãlkhi Palanquin. A   covered   seat   carried   on   poles   on   the 
shoulders of four or more people. 
panch Five.  
panch-amrut Nectar  of  five.    A  mixture  of  five  items,  used  in pujãs and 
abhishek.:  milk, yoghurt, ghee, honey, and sugar. 
panch-vishay The   five   types   of   objects   that   are   perceived   by   the 
indriyas:   shabda (sounds), sparsh (touches), rup (sights), 
ras (tastes), and gandh (smells). 
pandit Priest. 
pãni Hands.  Physical organ of handling objects. 
parã The divine sound produced in the navel of Virãt-Purush is 
known as the ‘parã’ speech.      For  the  purpose  of  creating 
the Veds, Bhagvãn Himself has inspired that ‘parã’ speech.  
[Sãrangpur – 6]  
pãrãk-kruchhra Form   of   harsh tap which   involves   fasting   for   twelve 
continuous days. 
Paramãtmã Greater  than  the ãtmã.    God.    Supreme  being.   Bhagvãn.  
Lord  of  all.    He  is  unparalleled,  omnipotent  and  the  all-
doer,  omniscient,  omnipresent,  the  ocean  of  all  forms  of 
bliss, does not have any attributes of Mãyã, divine, always 
taking  birth  on  earth  for  His bhaktas.    Resides  within  the 
ãtmã. 
param-bhãgvat Ideal bhakta of Bhagvãn, referring to a sat-purush or sant. 
param-ekãntik sant Ideal ekãntik sãdhu of Bhagvãn,  referring  to  a sat-purush 
or sant. 
Parameshvar See Bhagvãn. 
paramhans 1) Supreme  swan.    A  male sãdhu of  the  highest  order, 

Glossary 
- 840 - 
characterised  by  his  ability  to  discriminate  between 
sat and asat – just   as   swans   were   traditionally 
considered  to  be  able  to   distinguish  between  milk 
mixed with water. 
2) Traditionally,   they   do   not   only   abandon   worldly 
activities,  but  also  all  religious  accessories  such  as 
rites, symbols and objects – pujã, chãndlo, kanthi – and 
lead  a  life  of  travelling  and  preaching.    In  the  time  of 
Swãminãrãyan  Bhagvãn,  there  were  2,000  educated, 
talented   and   devout sãdhus of   which   500   were 
initiated  as paramhans.    These  were  later  re-initiated 
as sãdhus and    had    returned    to    performing    all 
traditional  religious  rites  and  rituals,  but  were  still 
known as paramhans. 
Parampad See Akshardhãm. 
parãrdhs Duration of time equalling 1 x 10
17
 human years. 
pãrasmani Alchemist’s stone.  Magical gem that turns iron into gold. 
Parbrahm Beyond Brahm.    God.    Supreme  being.   Bhagvãn.    He  is 
unparalleled,   omnipotent   and   the   all-doer,   omniscient, 
omnipresent, the ocean of all forms of bliss, does not have 
any  attributes  of Mãyã,  divine,  always  taking  birth  on 
earth  for  His bhaktas.    Resides  within  the ãtmã.    Also 
called Paramãtmã, Parbrahm, Krishna Nãrãyan,    and 
Swãminãrãyan. 
Highest of the five eternal entities (jeev, ishvar, Mãyã, and 
Brahm, and Parbrahm). 
pãrshad 1) Male tyãgi in   the   time   of Swãminãrãyan   Bhagvãn, 
similar  to  a sãdhu,  but  whose niyams were  not  as 
strict;   they   observed brahm-chãrya in   general   but 
were allowed to talk with women, and were allowed to 
touch  money  but  not  keep  it  for  themselves.    Most 
pãrshads shaved  their  heads  like  other sãdhus but 
wore a white dhoti and upper garment. 
2) Attendant of Bhagvãn. 
Parshurãm An avatãr of Bhagvãn.    He  incarnated  in  the svarup of  a 
brave  warrior.  Parshurãm had  great  devotion  for  His 
parents.      However,   His   father   was   hot-tempered, and 
Parshurãm inherited  this  quality  from  him.    Then,  His 

Glossary 
- 841 - 
father  was killed by Kartavirya Rãjã.  As Kartavirya was a 
kshatriya, Parshurãm vowed  to  kill  all  the kshatriyas on 
this earth.  So, He saved the earth from the tyranny of the 
kshatriyas and destroyed all the kings who were harassing 
the  people.  However, Parshurãm became  proud  of  his 
power.    As  He terrorised  the kshatriyas,  they  all  fled  and 
no  one  remained  to  protect  this  earth.    So,  Kashyap  Muni 
called  them  back  and  ordered Parshurãm to  leave  this 
world. 
Pãrvati Wife  of Shiv.    Mother  of Ganpati.    In  her  previous  life,  she 
was called Sati, and was married to Shiv.  However, as she 
had  vowed  to  always  be  married  to Shiv,  when  she  was 
reincarnated as Pãrvati, she again married Shiv.  
pashyanti When  the  ‘parã’ speech   reached   the hruday-ãkãsh of 
Virãt-Purush, it became known by the name of ‘pashyanti’. 
pati vratã A faithful wife.  A wife who observes the vow of fidelity is 
called  a pati  vratã.      A  true pati  vratã possesses  great 
powers, and even Bhagvãn must obey her wishes. 
patit-pãvan The rescuer of the fallen and the wretched. 
pãyu Anus.  Physical organ of excretion (one of the indriyas). 
pingalã nãdi Nerve   or   channel   of   a   masculine   nature   transmitting 
intellectual  and  mental  energy  within  the  inner  body  of  a 
person,  where  the  current  of  energy  flows  upward  and 
ends on the right side of the body.  One of the three major 
nãdis. 
Posh Seventh   month   of   the Ãshãdhi   Samvat year,   normally 
falling between December and January. 
pradakshinã Look   from   all   directions.   To   walk   in   the   clockwise 
direction  around  the murti of Bhagvãn with  a  focused 
mind, and receive His darshan from all directions.  A form 
of bhakti, signifying  that Bhagvãn is  the  centre  of  our 
lives;  just  as  the  sun  provide  energy  for  the  planets  that 
orbit it, Bhagvãn provides energy for us. The pradakshinã 
is performed in a clockwise direction so Bhagvãn remains 
on our right, which is the position of the master.  
Pradhãn Pradhãn-Prakruti. 

Glossary 
- 842 - 
Pradhãn-Prakruti Prakruti half  of  the Pradhãn-Purush pair, ‘conceived’ by 
Mul-Purush and Mul-Prakruti for    the    creation    and 
sustenance    of    each brahmãnd.        Also    called    simply 
Pradhãn. 
Pradhãn-Purush One of the countless pairs of Pradhãn-Prakruti and Purush 
‘conceived’  by Mul-Purush and Mul-Prakruti for   the 
creation and sustenance of each brahmãnd.  Subsequently, 
from each pair of Pradhãn-Purush, the twenty-four tattvas 
are created, and in turn, the jeevs and ishvars receive their 
respective bodies. 
Pradyumna One  of the  four  forms  of Bhagvãn’s Vishvarup svarup.    His 
role  is  to  explain  the tattvas,  and  to  cause  the  sustenance 
of   the brahmãnd (Virãt-Purush).      During   the   state   of 
sustenance, Virãt-Purush worships Pradyumna. 
prãgna Name  of  the jeevãtmã in  the sushupti state,  when  it  is 
conscious of its kãran body.  [Sãrangpur - 6] 
prajãpati The  maker  of  clay  and  mud  pots.    The devs that  preside 
over   procreation,   and   protect   life.  Brahmã,   Marichi, 
Daksh,  and  Kashyap  are  known  as prajãpatis,  as  they  are 
involved in creating life-forms and the world. 
prakruti Refers to chaitanya prakruti and/or jad prakruti. 
Prakruti 1) Divine  energy  or  instrument  of Bhagvãn that  initiates 
the creation process by being ‘impregnated’ by Purush 
– also   called Mul-Purush, Mahã-Purush,   or Akshar-
Purush – and  from  which  countless  pairs  of Pradhãn 
and Purush are  ‘conceived’  for  the  creation  and 
sustenance of each brahmãnd.  Taken to be feminine in 
nature,  she  is  composed  of  the  three gun,  is  both jad 
and chaitanya,  eternal, nirvishesh,  and  in  her  dormant 
state houses all jeevs and all elements. Also called Mul-
Prakruti, Mul-Mãyã, and Mahã-Mãyã.  
2) Also refers to Pradhãn-Prakruti. 
Prakruti-Purush The   pair   of Mul-Prakruti and Mul-Purush,   from   which 
countless pairs of Pradhãn and Purush are formed for the 
creation  and  sustenance  of  each brahmãnd.    Also  called 
Mul-Prakruti-Purush. 
prãkrut-pralay General  destruction.    Destruction  of  the  body  of Virãt-

Glossary 
- 843 - 
Purush (all   fourteen   loks   of   one brahmãnd,   and   the 
absorption    of Pradhãn-Purush and    the    twenty-four 
tattvas, including maha-tattva,   into Mahã-Mãyã (Mul-
Prakruti).    This  occurs  when  the  two-parãrdh lifespan  of 
Virãt-Purush has elapsed. 
pralay Destruction. 
prãn 
  
  
A vital air.  Breath.  Life force or energy flowing within the 
primary   life-currents   of   the   body,   called vãyu,   which 
control  crucial  bodily  functions.     There  are  five   main 
vãyus: 
 prãn – forward moving air 
 apãn – air that moves away 
 samãn – balancing air 
 udãn – ascending air 
 vyãn – outward moving air 
pranav A    transformed    form    of    the    divine,    transcendental 
vibration  emanated  at  the  moment  of  first  creation,  and 
from  which  all  other  sounds,  and  ultimately  the  sacred 
Veds, come forth.  The speech of Virãt-Purush became the 
form  of pranav by becoming the three sounds of ‘A’, ‘U’, 
and ‘M’, and then became the fifty-two syllables, and took 
the form of the four Veds.  The three-syllable – ‘A’, ‘U’ and 
‘M’ – sound known as AUM.  
prãnãyãm Controlling  the prãns.    Fourth  step  of ashtãng-yog,  which 
involves  controlling  of prãns through  breathing  exercises 
leading  to  the  calming  of  the chitt in  preparation  for 
concentration. 
prãrabdha Fate.  Destiny. 
prãrabdha karma Deeds  whose  consequences  are  already  set  in  motion.  
The  portion  of  the  stock  of karmas (sanchit karmas)  that 
are  presently  giving  rewards,  based  on  the  principle  of 
past   deeds   shaping   present   events.      The prãrabdha 
karmas influence  the  nature  of  a  person’s  body  and 
associations, prevailing circumstances, and  even  personal 
strengths. 
prasãd Food that has been  blessed  and sanctified after offering it 
to Bhagvãn.  

Glossary 
- 844 - 
pratham First. 
pratyãhãr Withdrawal of sensory inputs into the physical body, that 
enters  through  the  five  sense  organs.  The  fifth  step  of 
ashtãng-yog. 
pratyaksha Visible.  Present on earth.  Physical. 
praudhã 1) Highest.  Best. 
2) Used  to  describe  the gopis.    The praudhã gopis would 
do only that which pleases Bhagvãn.  In no way would 
they    use    any    cunning    methods    to    satisfy    their 
selfishness.         Their   only   wish   would   be   to   please 
Bhagvãn.        Therefore,    they    remain    happy    with 
whatever  pleases Bhagvãn.    Also,  they  would  never 
become angry at, or jealous of the other gopis who are 
equal   to   them.      They   would   also   abandon   vicious 
natures,  such  as mãn and matsar,  and  remain  alert  in 
the sevã of Bhagvãn.    They  would  never  do  anything 
that would displease Bhagvãn. 
pravrutti 1) Activity in the form of social duties and affairs.  In this 
sense, often used to refer to the path of a grahastha. 
2) Can     also     include     all     forms     of     activities     and 
responsibilities,  including religious  activities,  such  as 
sevã in   the mandir,   and   attending   to bhaktas of 
Bhagvãn.    A  person  increases bhakti and sevã rather 
than dhyãn and smaran. 
prãyshchit Penance.  Atonement. 
prem-lakshanã 
bhakti 
Profound, loving devotion. 
Pruthu An avatãr of Bhagvãn.    He  incarnated  in  the svarup of  a 
king  as  it  was  the  wish  of  the rushis.   The  earth  had 
concealed all vegetation within herself and as a result the 
whole  land  had  become  barren.   Pruthu returned  all  the 
vegetation  to  earth, and  made  the  world  beautiful  and 
attractive again.  
Pruthvi The devi of  the  earth.    Mother  Earth.    She  is  a svarup of 
Lakshmi. 
pruthvi Earth.    One  of  the  five bhuts,  from  which  the  physical 

Glossary 
- 845 - 
world  (Virãt-Purush)  is  formed.    It  supports  all jeevs,  and 
in the form of a physical body, the pruthvi is their home.  It 
separates the  other  four bhuts,  and  gives  a  physical  form 
to all life-forms. 
Punam Full  moon.    The  15th  day  of  the  light  half  of  an  Indian 
calendar month. 
Purãn Ancient.    A  set  of  eighteen shãstras recording  ancient 
Hindu    events    that   incorporate    ethical    and spiritual 
teachings, most popular of which is the Shreemad Bhãgvat 
Purãn.    The  other  seventeen  Purãns  are,  namely:    the 
Brahma  Purãn,  Padma  Purãn,  Vishnu  Purãn,    Vãyu  Purãn, 
Nãrad  Purãn,  Mãrkandey  Purãn,  Agney  Purãn,  Bhavishya 
Purãn,  Brahma-Vaivart  Purãn, Ling  Purãn,  Varãh  Purãn, 
Skand  Purãn,  Vãman  Purãn,  Kurma  Purãn,  Matsya  Purãn, 
Garud  Purãn,  and  Brahmãnd  Purãn.    Forms  a  portion  of 
the Smruti. 
Purush 1) An akshar-mukta selected    by Akshar-Brahm to 
‘impregnate’ Prakruti for  the  creation  process,  from 
which   countless   pairs   of Pradhãn and Purush are 
formed   for   the   creation   and   sustenance   of   each 
brahmãnd. 
2) Purush half of the Pradhãn-Purush pair, ‘conceived’ by 
Mul-Purush and Mul-Prakruti for   the   creation   and 
sustenance of each brahmãnd. 
3) Taken   to   be   masculine   in   nature, Purush is   the 
controller of Prakruti, and is also distinct from her.  He 
is indivisible, without a beginning, and without an end.  
He  is  self-luminous,  omniscient,  imperishable, satya, 
kshetragna,  and  the  cause  of  all  the  activities  that 
possess a form.  He also has a divya body. 
4) Also    called Mahã-Purush, Mul-Purush or Akshar-
Purush. 
purushãrths Collective  term  for  the  four  goals  pursued  by  all  Hindus:  
dharma (duties), arth (material  wealth), kãm (desires), 
and moksh (liberation).  [Amdãvãd – 5]. 
Purushottam God.      Supreme   being.    Bhagvãn.      He   is   unparalleled, 
omnipotent  and  the  all-doer,  omniscient,   omnipresent, 
the   ocean   of   all   forms   of   bliss,   does   not   have   any 
attributes of Mãyã, divine, always taking birth on earth for 

Glossary 
- 846 - 
His bhaktas.      Resides   within   the ãtmã.      Also   called 
Parbrahm, Paramãtmã, Krishna Nãrãyan, and 
Swãminãrãyan. 
purush-prayatna If  a  person  keeps  the  company  of  a  devout sãdhu and 
becomes  virtuous  through  his  own  thoughts,  then  that is 
known as purush-prayatna. 
  
R  
Rãdhã/Rãdhikã A sevak of Shree Krishna.  She eternally performs His sevã 
in Akshardhãm. 
rajãi A thick blanket. 
rãjarshi A  householder  or  royal  person  with  characteristics  like 
that of a rushi.  At a lower level than a brahmarshi. 
rãjas-ahankãr One of the three types of ahankãr that evolve from maha-
tattva and  from  which,  the  ten indriyas,  the buddhi,  and 
the prãns evolve. 
rãjasi Relating to rajo-gun.  Full of rajo-gun. 
rajo-gun  Quality   of   passion.      One   of   the   three gun of Mãyã 
(Prakruti)  characterised  by  incoherence  and  desires  for 
the  vishays.    When rajo-gun prevails,  the antah-karan 
becomes     polluted     and     many     disturbing     thoughts 
regarding  desires  for  the vishays arise,  making  it difficult 
to   worship Bhagvãn’s murti.      Also,   when rajo-gun is 
predominant,  the  rewards  of  any karmas performed  by  a 
jeev are  experienced  in  the svapna state.    The  products  of 
rajo-gun include   lust,   and   desires   for   enjoying   sense 
pleasures.  [Kãriyãni – 1] [Gadhadã II – 43]. 
Rãjput Son  of  the  king.    A  class  of  people  of  the kshatriya varna 
descending  originally  from  royal  lineage,  and  extremely 
strong and brave. 
rãkhadi A   decorative,   strand-like   bracelet   traditionally   tied   by 
sisters  on  their  brothers hands  on  the  day  of  Rakshã-
Bandhan (Shrãvan sud Punam) affirming their loving bond 
between each other, and in particular, the brother’s vow 
to protect his sister. 

Glossary 
- 847 - 
Rãm/Rãmchandra An avatãr of Bhagvãn.    He  incarnated  in  the svarup of  a 
king.  Shree Rãm was  the  perfect  human,  the  perfect  son, 
the  perfect  husband,  and  the  perfect  king.  He  was  exiled 
to  the  forest  for  fourteen  years,  with  His  wife Sitãji and 
His  brother  Lakshmanji.    When Sitãji was  kidnapped  by 
the   demon   Rãvan, Rãm saved   her   with   the   help of 
Hanumãnji and Lakshmanji, and killed Rãvan. 
Rãmãyan The  story  of Rãm.    A shãstra narrating  the  story  of Shree 
Rãm Bhagvãn,  which  includes  His  14-year  exile  from  the 
throne  of  Ayodhyã  to  the  forest; Sitã’s abduction  by  the 
evil demon Rãvan; Rãm’s ultimate victory over Rãvan and 
his armies; and the return of Rãm and Sitã to Ayodhyã.  It 
contains principles for society through the characteristics 
exhibited by Rãm, Sitã, Lakshmanji, and Bharatji. 
Rãmnavmi Birthday  of Shree Rãm – Chaitra sud 9.  A  fast  if  kept  on 
this  day,  and  it  is  celebrated  with  great  festivity.  Also  the 
birthday of Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn. 
ras A  taste.    One  of  the panch-vishays.    It  is  the  physical 
element   of jal,   and   is   perceived   by   the   tongue.      The 
characteristics of ras are sweetness, spiciness, 
distastefulness, bitterness, sourness, and saltiness. 
rãs Traditional  Indian  folkdance  normally  played  between  a 
collection of partners, each partner having a pair of sticks 
to strike in accompaniment to the music while singing and 
dancing in a circular motion. 
rasik Loving. Affectionate. Romantic. [Gadhadã – 26]. 
rãs-leelã The  divine rãs episode  of Shree Krishna with  the gopis of 
Vraj,  which  is  narrated  in  the  chapters  29-33  in  the  tenth 
skandh of   Shreemad   Bhãgvat.      Also   called rãs-panch-
ãdhyãyi. 
rasnã Tongue.  Physical organ of taste (one of the indriyas). 
rath Chariot. 
reto Feto, moliyu or shelu with  silky,  decorative  edges  woven 
with  golden  or  silver  threads.    Tied  around  the  head  or 
waist, or left to rest upon the shoulders. 

Glossary 
- 848 - 
rotlo A   basic   unleavened   bread-like   food   of   many   parts   of 
Gujarat made generally of millet flour that is patted into a 
flat,  circular  shape  before  being  cooked  on  an  earthen  or 
metal hot plate. 
Rudra A svarup of Shiv.  The dev of the ahankãr. 
rup A  sight.    One  of  the panch-vishays.   Rup is  the  physical 
element  of tej,  and  is  perceived  by  the  eyes.   Rup reveals 
the appearance of all objects, and resides in all objects in a 
small form, and changes as objects change. 
rup-choki A platform on the side of a set of stairs. 
Rushabh-Dev An avatãr of Bhagvãn.    He  incarnated  in  the svarup of  a 
king who became a tyãgi.  He abandoned his kingdom and 
one hundred sons. 
rushi A sage.  A tyãgi who performs severe tap and dhyãn.   The 
Veds were revealed by Brahmã to rushis. 
S  
sabhã Assembly.   A   group   of satsangis listening   to kathã or 
singing kirtans. 
sachidanand Eternal (sach), all-knowing (chid), and blissful (ãnãnd). 
sadguru A great sant.  
sãdhan-dashã A  person  in  the  process  of  attaining siddh-dashã.    Has 
attained    the    state    of brahm.        He    identifies    things 
separately; pleasant and unpleasant vishays do not appear 
to be equal. 
sãdhu Male  person  who  has  abandoned  worldly  duties  and  has 
chosen a strict life of religious activities under strict vows 
of poverty, brahm-chãrya, and obedience.  A tyãgi. 
sãfo A pãgh with one end hanging at the back or the side of the 
head. 
sagun With gun.  Possessing divine qualities and kalyãn-kãri gun. 
Also   means   great,   when   referring   to   the svarup of 
Bhagvãn. 

Glossary 
- 849 - 
sakãm bhakta A bhakta who  superficially  appears  to  be  a tyãgi and 
nishkãmi.    However,  he  does  not  have  wish  for  the murti 
of Bhagvãn,  but instead has desires for the darshan of the 
ãtmã and  the  four  types  of mukti.    Even  if  his nishchay is 
perfect,  is  a  great tyãgi, has  firm vairãgya,  intense ãtmã-
nishthã,  and  he  is  not  disturbed  by  inner  enemies,  if  he 
desires   anything   other   than   the pratyaksha svarup of 
Bhagvãn,  then  even  if  he  is  in  the  higher loks,  he  will 
certainly attain less bliss. 
sãkar Large sugar crystals. 
sãkshãtkãr When  that  talk  is  recalled  exactly  as  it  was,  with  absolute 
clarity  and  sincerity.    If  a  person  engages  in shravan, 
manan,  and nididhyãs about  the Bhagvãn and  His svarup 
of  the ãtmã,  then  he  will  attain sãkshãtkãr of  the ãtmã.  
Sãkshãtkãr cannot  be  attained  by  doing shravan alone, 
without  practicing  both manan and nididhyãs.  Also  used 
to  describe  something  that  has  been  so  well  learned  or 
understood that it becomes second nature. 
samãdhi 1) Trance.    A  spiritual  experience,  usually  of Bhagvãn or 
His dhãm,  in which  consciousness  of  the  body  and 
surroundings is lost. 
2) Eighth    and    final    step   of ashtãng-yog.        Spiritual 
experience   of   union   with Bhagvãn,   which   is   the 
highest level of yog. 
sampradãy Sect.  Fellowship. 
samudra manthan Churning  of  the  ocean.    The devs decided  to  churn  the 
ocean for precious gifts and amrut.  However, they needed 
the  demons  to  help  them  churn  the  ocean.    The devs 
offered   half   of   the amrut to the   demons,   and   they 
accepted.  First, they tore up Mount Mandarãnchal for use 
as  a  churning  stick.    Then,  a  serpent  named  Vasuki  was 
used  as  a  churning  rope.    The devs took  hold  of  the  tail, 
and the demons held the head.  While they were churning, 
Vasuki’s breath became very hot, which almost suffocated 
the  demons.   Bhagvãn then  took  the avatãr of Kurma to 
stop   the   mountain   from   sinking   into   the   ocean   bed.  
Finally, the ocean produced precious items: poison, a cow, 
a  horse,  a  white  elephant,  a  diamond,  a  wishing  tree,  an 
apsãrã,  alcohol, Lakshmi, Chandra, Surya,  a  jewel,  a  conch 

Glossary 
- 850 - 
shell,   and   a   bow.    Shiv swallowed   the   poison,   which 
caused   his   throat   to   turn   blue.      Finally, Dhanvantari 
(avatãr of Bhagvãn)  emerged  from  the  ocean,  holding  an 
urn  of amrut.   The devs and  demons  fought  over  the 
amrut.    However, Bhagvãn did  not  want  the  demons  to 
obtain   it   as   it   would   give   them   immortality.      So,   He 
assumed the avatãr of Mohini to distract the demons. 
Samvat The calendar established by Indian emperor 
Vikramaditya of Ujjain following his victory 56 BCE.  It is a 
lunar  calendar  based  on  ancient Hindu tradition.    The 
Vikram  Samvat  calendar  is  56.7  years  ahead  of  the  solar 
Gregorian calendar.  The calendar most commonly used is 
the Kãrtiki Samvat, which begins on the first day of Kãrtik.  
However,  the  Vachanãmrut  is  written  using  the Ashãdhi 
Samvat, which begins on the first day of Ãshãdh.  
Sanakãdik An avatãr of Bhagvãn.   He incarnated in  the svarup of the 
four   sons   of Brahmã: Sanak, Sanãtan, Sanandan,   and 
Sanat-Kumãr.  Born  from Brahmã's mind,  the  four  sons 
are described as great rushis who undertook lifelong vows 
of brahm-chãrya against  the  wishes  of their  father.    From 
the Sanakãdik, the brãhmans got the inspiration regarding 
the   values   and   importance   of tap and brahm-chãrya.  
Although  they  are  eternally  liberated  souls  from  birth, 
they  still  became  attracted  to  the  devotional  service  of 
Bhagvãn.  Despite being very senior in age, the Sanakãdik 
are  said  to  wander  the  universe  in  the  forms  of  small 
children.  Also called Chãtur Kumãr or Kumãr San. 
sanchit karma Accumulated  deeds.    Immeasurable  stock  of  all  deeds 
performed,  in  infinite  past  lives  and  in  the  present  life.  
The karmas are   retained  in  the kãran body  until  the 
karmas ‘ripen’ to eventually give rewards as prãrabdha 
karmas,  either  later  in  the  present  life  or  in  a  future  life.  
[Vadtãl – 6]. 
sandhyã 1) Evening. 
2) The forth ãrti of the day, performed in the evening. 
sang  
(pronounced sung) 
Company.  Association. 
Sankarshan One  of the  four  forms  of Bhagvãn’s Vishvarup svarup.    His 

Glossary 
- 851 - 
role  is  to  teach  spiritual  knowledge,  and  to  cause  the 
destruction   the brahmãnd (Virãt-Purush).      During   the 
state of destruction, Virãt-Purush worships Sankarshan. 
Sãnkhya A  philosophy  that  analyses  the tattvas,  and  states  that 
there are twenty-five tattva.  Founded by Kapil-Dev. 
sãnkhya Fundamental    belief   of   the    Sãnkhya    philosophy.        It 
proposes that all that evolves from Mãyã is perishable and 
vain.    After  developing  thoughts  of sãnkhya,  the bhakta 
gradually  becomes  detached  from  worldly, mãyik objects 
and become further absorbed in Bhagvãn. 
sãnkhya-yogi A yogi who  has  abandoned  activities.    Term  used  for  a 
bhakta who  has  abandoned  his/her  worldly  duties – as 
opposed  to  a karma-yogi – and  is  sincerely  striving  for 
kalyãn.    Refers  to  a tyãgi who  is  totally  dedicated  and 
committed   to satsang.      In   the   time   of Swãminãrãyan 
Bhagvãn,  many  widows  and  widowers  chose  to  become 
sãnkhya-yogis after   their   spouse   passed   away.      They 
dedicated  their  lives  to Bhagvãn rather  than  any  other 
family members.  Often refers to female tyãgis. 
sannyãs ãshram Last of the four stages of life, when a person abandons all 
worldly duties and lives as a tyãgi. 
sannyãsi Person who has abandoned all worldly duties and is living 
as a tyãgi. 
sanshay Curiosity.  When questions arise in the mind. 
sanskãr Impression.      Refers   to   the   pleasant   and   unpleasant 
impression  of  a karma performed  earlier  in  the  present 
life  or  in  a  previous  life.    It  is  imprinted  and  accumulated 
in  the kãran body.    This  impression  in  turn  influences 
actions  and  achievements   in  the   present  and/or  later 
lives. 
sant A sãdhu.    A tyãgi.  In  the  Vachanãmrut, sant refers  to sat-
purush. 
sãrangi An Indian stringed musical instrument played by stroking 
the strings with a bow and depressing strings on a fretted 
neck.  Of all Indian instruments, it is said to most resemble 
the sound of the human voice. 

Glossary 
- 852 - 
Sarasvati The devi of knowledge. 
sarodã An Indian stringed musical instrument played by plucking 
with a plectrum and depressing strings on a fretless neck. 
sarvagna The power to see the creation of brahmãnds. 
sarvopari The lord of all. 
sat 1) True. Real. 
2) Permanent, imperishable and unchanging.  Is unbound 
by the past, the present, and the future. 
satãr Indian  stringed  musical  instrument  played  by  striking 
with  a  wire  plectrum  and  depressing  strings  on  a  fretted 
neck.  Similar to a sitãr. 
sãthvo A mixture of different types of roasted flour, which is then 
mixed with salt and water. 
sati A widow who, out of her total dedication and commitment 
to her husband, voluntary kills herself by throwing herself 
on her dead husband’s burning funeral pyre. 
sat-purush A  true sant.    A sant who  guides  a  person  on  the  path  of 
Bhagvãn.  A guru for   a mumukshu.      Through   whom 
Bhagvãn remains  ever-manifest,  passing  on  His  divine 
energy and experience, love and guidance to all beings on 
earth.    They  ensure  that  the  gateway  to  liberation  and 
Bhagvãn is forever open for all seekers.  Surrendering to a 
sat-purush, and striving to obey his ãgnã, is the root of all 
spiritual   activities.      Also   called sant, bhakta, ekãntik 
bhakta, ekãntik sant, param-bhãgvat, param-ekãntik sant, 
and sadguru. 
satsang 1) True   company.    The   practice   of   associating   with 
Bhagvãn’s sant,   other satsangis,   the ãtmã,   and   the 
sacred shãstras,   and   also   observing vartmãns and 
niyams. 
2) Also refers to  the sampradãy, which is the presence of 
good company. 
satsangi A person who practises satsang. 
sattva-gun Quality   of   goodness.      One   of   the   three gun of Mãyã 
(Prakruti)    characterised   by    awareness    and vairãgya 

Glossary 
- 853 - 
towards the vishays.  When sattva-gun prevails, the antah-
karan is   pure,   and   a   person   can   pleasantly   worship 
Bhagvãn’s murti.    Also,  when sattva-gun is  predominant, 
the   rewards   of   any karmas performed   by   a jeev are 
experienced  during  the jãgrat state.    The  products  of 
sattva-gun include   happiness, gnãn, vairãgya,   wisdom, 
tranquillity, and tap.  [Kãriyãni – 1] [Gadhadã II – 43]. 
sãttvik Relating to sattva-gun.  Full of sattva-gun. 
sãttvik-ahankãr One of the three types of ahankãr that evolve from maha-
tattva, and from which the man, and the presiding devs of 
the indriyas evolve. 
satya Truth. 
Satya-Yug First  of  the  four yugs that  mark  the  time-scale  of  the 
world.    Lasting  1,728,000  human  years,  it  is  the  purest 
and  most  righteous  of  the yugs,  where  people  lived  to  be 
100,000,   all   were brãhmans,  everyone’s  wishes  were 
fulfilled, and everyone worshipped Bhagvãn. 
savikalp With alternatives or doubts.  Used to describe the state in 
which   a   person   sees Bhagvãn,   but   with   doubts   or 
distinctions still remaining in his mind – in contrast to the 
nirvikalp state,  in  which  no  distinctions  remain  and  a 
person sees only Bhagvãn. [Gadhadã I – 39]. 
savikalp samãdhi A state of realisation, in which a person sees Bhagvãn but 
doubts   or   distinctions   still   remain – in   contrast   to 
nirvikalp samãdhi,  in  which  no  distinctions  remain  and  a 
person sees only Bhagvãn.  [Gadhadã I – 39]. 
sevak Servant of Bhagvãn. 
sevati Flower  of  the  chrysanthemum  genus,  found  to  blossom 
unusually out of season. Also known as guldãvadi. 
shabda A sound.  One of the panch-vishays.  Shabda is the physical 
element of ãkãsh, and  is perceived by the  ears.   Shabda is 
indicator of all objects, the cause of all social interactions, 
and reveals the nature and class of the speaker. 
shad-urmi The  six  physical  and  emotional  feelings:  thirst,  hunger, 
grief, infatuation, old age, and death. 

Glossary 
- 854 - 
shakti-panthi Follower  of  a  Shakti  cult.      They  worship  Shakti,  as  the 
governing   power   of   the   world,   and   they   believe   the 
consumption of meat and alcohol to be holy.  Animals are 
sacrificed in front of a murti Shakti, and offered as prasãd.  
One of the four types of kusangis. 
shãligrãm A   small   sacred   stone   (usually   black)   worshipped   by 
Vaishnavs as a form of Vishnu.  Found in the waters of the 
River Gandki, flowing through the foothills of Tibet, which 
is  considered  especially  sacred  because  of  the  numerous 
rushis who performed tap on her banks. 
shankh Conch shell. 
sharabh A  legendary  beast  thought  to  be  fiercer  than  a  lion,  and 
which roams in the Himalayas. 
Shãradã A svarup of Pãrvati. 
sharir 1) Embodiment.    That  which  is  pervaded,  inspired  and 
governed by the ãtmã. 
2) Refers  to  the  physical  and  non-physical  world,  which 
is  pervaded,  inspired,  and  governed  by Bhagvãn,  its 
shariri. 
shariri 1) That   which   is   embodied.      That   which   pervades, 
inspires and governs the sharir. 
2) Refers    to Bhagvãn,    who    pervades,    inspires,    and 
governs   the   physical   and   non-physical   world,   His 
sharir. 
shãstra Religious and scared scripture. 
shat-sampatti The   six   spiritual   activities   prescribed   by   the   Sãnkhya 
philosophy:  
 sham (tranquillity) 
 dam (self-control; restraint of sense organs) 
 uparati  (abstinence;  refraining  from  mundane  objects 
and activities) 
 titikshã (endurance; overcoming comforts and 
hardships) 
 samãdhãn  (stability;  balance  of  mind  and  focus  on 
Bhagvãn) 
 shraddhã (faith; persistence) 

Glossary 
- 855 - 
shelu Rich fabric with a silky finish woven with golden or silver 
threads  and  decorative  edges.      It  is  worn  as  an  upper 
garment  or  tied  around  the  head  or  waist,  or  even  left  to 
rest upon the shoulders. 
Shesh A dev with  the svarup of  a  cobra.    He  lives  in  Pãtãl  where 
he acts as the bed of Vishnu.  This gives Bhagvãn the name 
of Shesh-Shãyi-Nãrãyan. 
Shesh-Shãyi 
Nãrãyan 
The svarup of Bhagvãn when  He  is  resting  upon Shesh in 
Pãtãl. 
shikhã A  long  tuft  or  lock  of  hair  left  at  the  back  of  the  shaven 
head  of  males.  The shikhã is  usually  kept  at  the brahm-
randhra. 
shikhar The dome above a mandir. 
shikhar-bandh 
mandir 
A mandir with  domes  on  the  top.    Below  each  dome  is  a 
three-dimensional murti, carved in stone, wood, or metal. 
shikshã Knowledge.  Enlightenment.  Wisdom. 
Shikshãpatri Concise shãstra of    212    Sanskrit    verses    written    by 
Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn on Vasant Panchmi (Mahã sud 5), 
for  all  of  His  followers:    male  and  female,  married,  young 
and  old, tyãgi and grahastha,  educated  and  uneducated, 
and   even   those   in   sovereign   power.      Serves   as   a 
fundamental  code  of  conduct  encompassing  everything 
from  basic  civic  norms  (from  personal  hygiene  to  social 
ethics), up to universal philosophy and spirituality. 
shingadiyo 
vachhnãg 
Type    of    aquatic    plant    whose    leaves    are    potently 
poisonous. 
shishumãr chakra Shishumãr wheel.    One  of  the  centres  of  spiritual  energy 
located  in  the  inner  body,  seen  as  a  seat  of  instinctive 
consciousness. 
shishya Disciple of a guru. 
Shiv The dev of  destruction.    Part  of  the trimurti.    He  lives  in 
Kailas with his wife Pãrvati. 
shlok A verse from shãstras. 

Glossary 
- 856 - 
shraddhã The  quality  that  incorporates  determination,  faith,  trust, 
hope, patience, and persistence. 
shravan 1) To listen to talks of Bhagvãn through the ears. 
2) The  term  also  means  the  initial  intake  of gnãn from 
any of the outer indriyas.  In this sense, darshan, intake 
of gnãn through  the  eyes,  is  also  considered  a  form  of 
shravan.    However,  the  intake  of gnãn through  the 
process  of shravan (listening)  must  be  strengthened 
with manan (thinking)  and nididhyãs (remember)  if  it 
is to lead to the sãkshãtkãr (realisation) of that gnãn. 
Shrãvan Second   month   of   the Ãshãdhi Samvat   year,   normally 
falling between July and August. 
Shree 1) Name of Lakshmi. 
2) Used  before  the  names  of Bhagvãn and devs to  signify 
their high status. 
Shreemad Bhãgvat Most  popular  of the  eighteen  Purãns  written  by Vyãsji.    It 
narrates the life, leelãs, and charitras of various avatãrs of 
Bhagvãn,  particularly Shree Krishna Bhagvãn.    One  of  the 
eight shãstras accepted  as  trustworthy  by Swãminãrãyan 
Bhagvãn. 
Shrivatsa Divine  marking  found  on  the  chests  of murtis of Bhagvãn 
and Shree Krishna, similar to a birthmark. 
shrotra Ears.  Physical organ of sound (one of the indriyas). 
Shruti That  which  is  revealed  and  heard.    Philosophical  and 
spiritual wisdom – as revealed to the rushis after strict tap 
and deep dhyãn.  The four Veds are Shruti shãstras. 
shudra Labourer.    Skilled  worker  traditionally  serving  the  other 
three varnas (brãhmans, kshatriyas,  and vaishyas).    The 
lowest  of  the  four varnas (castes)  of  the  ancient  Indian 
social system. 
shuli Sharp, pointed vertical stake to which a criminal is bound 
and  then  allowed  to  be  pierced  by  his  or  her  own  weight 
as   the   pole   is   turned.      A   form   of   brutal   execution 
performed  in  public  as  an  effective  deterrent  to  major 
crimes. 

Glossary 
- 857 - 
shushka-gnãn Dry  knowledge.    Refers  to  the  Advait  philosophy.    It  is 
called ‘dry’ as it disclaims the existence of a personal 
Bhagvãn,  and  so  does  not  propose  any  form  of bhakti 
towards Him. 
shushka-vedãnt Dry vedãnt.  The Advait philosophy.  The Vedãnt principle 
proposing    that    the    ultimate    reality    is    only brahm.  
Referred to as ‘dry’ because it denies the existence of a 
personal Bhagvãn,  His  eternally  divine svarup,  and  His 
dhãm.    Therefore,  it  does  not  propose  any  form  of bhakti 
or worship of Bhagvãn and His avatãrs.  [Gadhadã II – 19] 
[Gadhadã III – 28]. 
shushka-vedãnti A   person   who   follows   the shushka-vedãnt philosophy.  
One of the four types of kusangis. 
Shvet-Dvip The dhãm of Vãsudev Bhagvãn.    The muktas of Shvet-Dvip 
are called niranna-muktas,  as  they  do  not consume  water 
(nir) or food (ann).  Also, they are free from the shad-urmi 
(six  physical  and  emotional  feelings).  The muktas that 
reside  in  this dhãm are ãtmãs who  have  been  freed  from 
the  cycle  of  births  and  deaths,  but  have  not  yet  attained 
Akshardhãm.  So, they perform continuous tap, in order to 
attain ultimate moksh. 
Siddh A yogi. 
siddh-dashã Elevated   state.      No   differentiation   is   made   between 
objects  and  pleasant  and  unpleasant vishays.    Attained  by 
those who have become yogis.  A person with siddh-dashã 
has   the   ability   to   see   for   thousands   of   miles   while 
remaining  in  one  place,  and  hear  talks  from  thousands  of 
miles  away,  and  he  has  the  ability  to obtain  any  object 
with his own hands, even from other loks. 
siddhi Wealth.  Riches.  The siddhi are shown to bhaktas on their 
way to Akshardhãm, to test their love for Bhagvãn. 
sinhãsan Decorated throne. 
Sitãji The  wife  of Shree  Rãm.    Also  called  Jãnki,  Vaidehi,  and 
Maithili. 
skandh Chapter.  Section.  Volume of a shãstra. 

Glossary 
- 858 - 
smaran Remembrance.  To remember. 
Smruti That  which  is  remembered.    The  Smruti shãstras were 
written after remembering past events.  These include the 
Purãns, Upanishads, Mahãbhãrat, Rãmãyan, and 
Shreemad Bhãgvat. 
sneh Affection.  Love. 
sparsh A  touch.    One  of  the panch-vishays.   Sparsh is  the  physical 
element   of vãyu,   and   is   perceived   by   the   skin.      The 
characteristics  of sparsh are  softness,  hardness,  cold,  and 
heat. 
sthãvar Immobile.  Inanimate.  Life-forms such as trees. 
sthitapragna A   person   with   a   stable   understanding.  A bhakta of 
Bhagvãn who has no doubts at all regarding the svarup of 
Bhagvãn,  and  glorifies  His  strengths.    He  also  glorifies 
those charitras of Bhagvãn that     appear     to     be 
inappropriate,  in  exactly  the  same  way  that  he  glorifies 
charitras that are appropriate.   [Gadhadã II – 17]. 
sthiti 1) The level of the spiritual state of a bhakta. 
2) Sustenance of the world. 
Sthul Physical.    One  of  the  three  bodies  of  the jeev.    It  is  the 
visible, physical body of the jeev, which is composed of the 
five bhuts.    The jeev attains  a  different sthul body  upon 
each birth. 
Stotra A hymn of praise. 
Sud Bright half of a Hindu lunar month in which the moon is in 
its  waxing  phase.    The  days  between Amãs up  to  and 
including Punam. Also called shukla paksh. 
sudarshan chakra Fiery,  disc-like  weapon  originally  used  by Bhagvãn,  with 
the power and radiance of several suns. 
sukshma Subtle.  One of the three bodies of the jeev.  It is the subtle 
body  of  the jeev,  which  is  composed  of  nineteen tattvas:  
the  five gnãn-indriyas,  the five karma-indriyas,  the  five 
prãns,  and  the  four antah-karans.    Unlike  the sthul body, 
the sukshma body  is  not  visible  and  is  commonly  thought 
of as the mental body. 

Glossary 
- 859 - 
Survãl Loose trousers. 
Surya-Dev The dev of the Sun. 
sushumnã 1) Uninterrupted path of light from the brahm-randhra to 
Prakruti-Purush.  [Gadhadã I – 65]. 
2) Path  by  which  the  sound  produced  by Parbrahm via 
Akshar-Brahm pervades   the   navel   of Virãt-Purush.  
[Sãrangpur – 6]. 
sushumnã nãdi Nerve  or  channel  transmitting  cosmic  energy  within  the 
inner body of a person, where the current passes through 
the  spinal  column  from  the  base  of  the  spine  and  ends  in 
the brahm-randhra located in the crown of the head.  One 
of the three major nãdis. 
sushupti Unconscious.  Deep sleep.  One of the three mental states.  
The sushupti state  is  the  result  of  the  destruction  state  of 
ishvar.  It is full of tamo-gun and is located in the region of 
the  heart.    In  the sushupti state,  the jeevãtmã is  known  as 
prãgna,  and  is  conscious  of  its kãran body.    [Sãrangpur – 
6]. 
sutrãtmã The  subtle  body  of  the  three  bodies  of Virãt-Purush and 
other ishvars.  Equivalent to the sukshma body of the jeevs.  
[Kãriyãni – 12]. 
svabhãv 1) Nature. 
2) Flaw.      Negative   characteristic.      A   person’s  vicious 
natures, such as kãm, krodh, lobh, and moh.  Also used 
to refer to a person’s natures in the form of habits 
formed  after  repeated  actions,  in  this  birth  or  in  the 
past  lives.    A svabhãv must  be  eradicated  in  order  to 
attain kalyãn,  which  is  achieved  by  listening  to  the 
advice of Bhagvãn and His sant. 
svãd Craving for taste. 
svadharma A person’s own dharma, related to his varna and ãshram. 
svapna Dream.    One  of  the  three  mental  states.    The svapna state 
is the result of the creation state of Hiranyagarbh.  It is full 
of rajo-gun and  is  located  in  the  region  of  the  throat.    In 
the svapna state,  the jeevãtmã is  known  as taijas,  and  is 
conscious of its sukshma body.   [Sãrangpur – 6]. 

Glossary 
- 860 - 
svarup A physical form. 
svastik This  sacred  sign  symbolises  the  focusing  of Bhagvãn’s 
energy  from  all  four  directions  to  the  centre.    A chihn on 
Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn’s right foot.  Performing dhyãn on 
this chihn grants  the bhakta a  happy  life  free  of  misery, 
and good luck. 
svayam-prakãsh To  emit  own  light.   Bhagvãn is  described  as svayam-
prakãsh as he is luminous. 
svedaj Born  from  sweat.    Life-forms  born  from  sweat  (lower  life 
forms, such as bacteria). 
Swãminãrãyan 1) The lord of the whole world.  Creator and destroyer of 
everything, 
2) The mantra (mahã-mantra)  given  by Swãminãrãyan 
Bhagvãn to   His bhaktas   in when   Faneni,   after   He 
became  head  of  the sampradãy.    Eventually  people 
began  to  identify  Shreeji  Mahãrãj  by  this mantra and 
called Him Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn.  The mantra holds 
power  greater  than  any  other mantra.    The  greatness 
of  the mantra is described in ‘Je Swãminãrãyan Nãm 
Leshe’ from Shree Hari-Leelãmrut.  
 
 The “Swãminãrãyan” name  burns  the  sins  of  those 
who speak it 
 Bhagvãn’s names  are  in  many shãstras,  but  this  is 
considered the greatest   
 Saying “Swãminãrãyan” once,  is  like  saying  other 
names thousands of times 
 No-one  can  describe  the  rewards  we  receive  from 
saying “Swãminãrãyan” 
 The mantra is  so  great,  that  all  your  desires are 
fulfilled by it 
 It   brings   happiness   and   destroys   sorrows,   and 
allows you to attains Akshardhãm 
 If  it  is  heard  at  the  end  of  life,  even  a  sinner  can 
attain moksh 
 Evil spirits run from the mantra 
 Wisdom awakens after hearing “Swãminãrãyan” 
 The yamduts fear those who say “Swãminãrãyan” 
 As    water    washes    the    body, “Swãminãrãyan” 
cleanses the soul 

Glossary 
- 861 - 
T  
Taijas Name  of  the jeevãtmã in  the svapna state,  when  it  is 
conscious of its sukshma body.  [Sãrangpur – 6] 
tãmas-ahankãr One of the three types of ahankãr that evolve from maha-
tattva,   and   from   which   the   five bhuts and   the   five 
tanmãtrãs. 
Tãmasi Relating to tamo-gun.  Full of tamo-gun. 
tamo-gun Quality   of   darkness.      One   of   the   three gun of Mãyã 
(Prakruti) characterised by unconsciousness and 
ignorance.    When tamo-gun prevails,  no  thoughts  arise  in 
the antah-karan,  and  a  person  experiences  a  feeling  of 
emptiness.      Also,   when tamo-gun is   predominant,   the 
rewards    of    any karmas performed    by    a jeev are 
experienced during the state of sushupti.  The products  of 
tamo-gun include    laziness,    sleep,    anger,    and    greed.   
[Kãriyãni – 1] [Gadhadã II – 43]. 
tanmãtrã A  subtle  element,  in  contrast  to  the  five bhuts.    There  are 
five tanmãtrãs in total and each one is the root cause of its 
corresponding bhut:    sights  (of tej),  sounds  (of ãkãsh), 
smells (of pruthvi), tastes (of jal) and touch (of vãyu). Also 
called vishay. 
tap  
(pronounced tup) 
Physical  strictness.    Penance.  Enduring  harsh  weather 
conditions. 
tapasvi A person who performs tap. 
tapta-kruchhra Form of harsh tap which involves a twelve-day vrat: three 
days  on  three pali (340g)  of    warm  water,  followed  by 
three  days  on  two pali (227g)  of  warm  milk,  followed  by 
three  days  on  one pali (113g)  of  warm ghee,  follow  by 
three days of complete fasting. 
tattva An  element.    That  which  is  produced  from Mãyã.    There 
are twenty-four tattvas that have evolved from Mãyã:  the 
five gnãn-indriyas,  the  five karma-indriyas,  the  five prãns, 
and the four antah-karans. 
tej Fire  or  energy.    One  of  the  five bhuts,  from  which  the 
physical  world  (Virãt-Purush)  is  formed.    It  is  luminous, 

Glossary 
- 862 - 
causes  the  digestion  of  food,  absorbs  liquids,  eliminates 
cold,  dries,  creates  hunger  and  thirst,  and  burns  wood, 
ghee and other sacrificial offerings.   [Gadhadã I-12]. 
thãl Food devotionally offered to Bhagvãn as a form of bhakti, 
which in turn blesses the food – turning it into prasãd. 
til A small mole (beauty spot).  
tirth A place of pilgrimage. 
torã A   tassel,   usually   hung   from   a pãgh.    Swãminãrãyan 
Bhagvãn often wore torã made of flowers. 
Tretã-Yug Second  of  the  four yugs that  mark  the  time-scale  of  the 
world.      Lasting   1,296,000   human   years,   it   was   when 
purity   and   righteousness   had   slightly   diminished,   the 
instincts  of  the kshatriyas prevailed,  people  lived  to  be 
10,000, and people’s wishes were not so readily fulfilled.  
Called  the Tretã-Yug,  or  age  of  three,  because  the  general 
ratio  of  good  deeds  performed  to  bad  deeds  was  three  to 
one. 
trigunãtmik The three gun of Mãyã – sattva-gun, rajo-gun, tamo-gun. 
trikon A  triangle.    A chihn on Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn’s left  foot.  
Performing dhyãn on  this chihn frees  a bhakta from  the 
bondage and the three bodies – sthul, sukshma, kãran; and 
the  three  mental  states – jãgrat,  svapna;  sushupti. He 
becomes brahm-rup. 
trimurti Three devs responsible  for  the  control  of  a brahmãnd.  
Brahma (creator), Vishnu (sustainer), Shiv (destroyer). 
trushnã Craving.  Desire. 
tulsi 1) Basil.    Variety  of  plant  in  the  mint  family,  native  to 
warm   regions.      Its   aromatic   leaves   have   inherent 
healing  qualities  and  also  is  often  used  as  seasoning.  
Used  as  a  fragrant  offering  to Bhagvãn.  The  wood  of 
the  plant  is  also  used  in  the  making  beads  for mãlãs 
and kanthis. 
2) Bhagvãn made  a pati-vratã named  Vrundã  break  her 
pati-vratã vow.    So,  she  cursed Bhagvãn and  turned 
Him  into shãligrãm (stone),  and  He  in  turn  cursed 

Glossary 
- 863 - 
Vrundã and turned her into tulsi (plant).  However, He 
also gave her the vardãn that she will be present in the 
pujã of Bhagvãn.    Therefore, tulsi is  considered  to  be 
extremely  holy.    The  wedding  of Tulsi and Bhagvãn is 
celebrated every year. 
turyapad Fourth  mental  state,  which  refers  to Bhagvãn – who  is 
beyond  the  three  mental  states  of jãgrat, svapna,  and 
sushupti.   That  which  gives  knowledge  of  the  distinctions 
between the mental states to the jeevãtmã, and who gives 
the jeev the  rewards  of  its karmas  accordingly  within 
those  states,  is  known as turyapad,  as  the antaryãmi,  as 
the drashtã, as Brahm, and also as Parbrahm. 
tvak Skin.  Physical organ of touch (one of the indriyas). 
tyãg To abandon. 
tyãgi A person who has abandoned the world and worldly life. 
  
U  
udbhij Born  from  passing through.    Life-forms  born  out  of  the 
ground (all forms of plant-life). 
Uddhav Sampradãy The sampradãy of  Uddhav.  Name  used  by Swãminãrãyan 
Bhagvãn to   refer   to   the   Swãminãrãyan   Sampradãy.  
Named after Rãmãnand Swãmi, who initiated 
Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn and who   was   considered   the 
avatãr of  Uddhav – Shree Krishna’s trusted  advisor  and 
one of his great bhaktas. 
Upanishad Collection  of  philosophical  texts  written  by  the  ancient 
rushis,  that  primarily  revolves  around  the  discussion  of 
the nature of the ãtmã, the world, mãyã, and reality. Of the 
108 Upanishads, ten are considered to be the ‘principal 
Upanishads’ upon which philosophers and ãchãryas have 
written commentaries. 
upãsanã 1) Literally means ‘sitting near’. It is the philosophical 
understanding  of  the  nature  of Bhagvãn – What  is  He 
like?  How  do  we  worship  Him? This  allows  a bhakta to 
become closer to Bhagvãn. 

Glossary 
- 864 - 
2) A firm belief in the sãkãr svarup of Bhagvãn. 
3) Worship of Bhagvãn. 
upastha Genitalia. Physical   organ   of   procreation   (one   of   the 
indriyas). 
updesh Advice.  Guidance. 
upsham When a person becomes absolutely unaware of the world 
while meditating Bhagvãn or his ãtmã.  When his indriyas 
are   presented   with attractive   objects, he   focuses   his 
attention  within,  and  forgets  about  the  attractive  objects.  
As a result, he becomes tranquil and peaceful. 
upvãs A  fast  where  food  is  not  consumed.    However,  a  person 
may drink water if required. 
urdhva-pundra 
tilak 
A yellow ‘U’ mark applied to the forehead made with 
sandalwood  paste,  and  a chãndlo of kum-kum if  made  in 
the centre.  The tilak signifies Nãrãyan (Bhagvãn), and the 
chãndlo signifies Lakshmi.      The tilak and chãndlo are 
applied  during pujã in  the  morning.  It  must  be  applied 
everyday is it is the ãgnã of Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn for all 
of His bhaktas.  The tilak and chãndlo shows that a person 
has  completely  surrendered  his  life  to Bhagvãn and  has 
become  His bhakta.    Females  only  apply  the chãndlo of 
kum-kum. 
urdhva-rekhã Line.   This chihn runs from the space between the big toe 
and  the  first  toe  to  the  heel  of  the  right  foot.    Performing 
dhyãn on  this chihn spiritually  elevates  the  mind  and 
takes  the bhakta to Akshardhãm.    The urdhva-rekhã lines 
are also found on the left foot. 
urdhvaretã Strict brahm-chãri who  does  not  allow  the  ejaculation  of 
semen. 
utpatti Creation. 
uttam Highest.  Best.  Superior. 
  
V  
vachan 1) A command.  An ãgnã. 

Glossary 
- 865 - 
2) A promise. 
3) Words or speech. 
Vachanãmrut Amrut in  the  form  of  words.    A  collection  of  273  spiritual 
talks   delivered   by Swãminãrãyan   Bhagvãn,   that   were 
carefully  noted  and  collated  by  His  senior sãdhus in  His 
presence,   and   were   authenticated   by   Him.      Central 
philosophical shãstra of  the  Swãminãrãyan  Sampradãy 
that summarises the essence of all Hindu shãstras. 
vad Dark half of a Hindu lunar month in which the moon is in 
its  waning  phase.    The  days  falling  between  the  day  after 
Punam up  to  and  including Amãs.  Also  called  krishna 
paksh. 
vadvãnal Form  of fire  that  resides  within  the  oceans,  yet  it  never 
extinguishes. 
vaijayanti Unique  garland  adorned   by Bhagvãn and  His avatãrs, 
generally  depicted  as  reaching  down  to  the  feet.    Made  of 
five types of gems (rubies, pearls, sapphires, emeralds and 
diamonds – representing the five elements) and/or divine 
flowers that never wither. 
vaikhari When  the  ‘parã’ speech   reached   the   mouth   of Virãt-
Purush, it became known by the name of ‘vaikhari’. 
Vaikunth The dhãm of Vishnu, and Rãm Bhagvãn. 
vairãgya Detachment.  A hatred or strong dislike for the world and 
its mãyik pleasures   (the panch-vishays).      Remaining 
detached  from  the  body  and  the brahmãnd,  and  from  all 
things  that  are  the  products  of Prakruti.    One  of  the  four 
attributes of ekãntik dharma. 
Vaishãkh Tenth month of the Ãshãdhi Samvat year, normally falling 
between April and May. 
Vaishnav Follower of Bhagvãn’s various avatãrs, in particular Shree 
Krishna Bhagvãn.  Relating to Vishnu. 
vaishvãnar Fire  of  digestion.    The  energy  that  allows  food  to be 
digested. 
vaishya Merchant.  Businessman or employer traditionally dealing 
with  financial  and  commercial  matters  in  society.    The 

Glossary 
- 866 - 
third  of  the  four varnas (castes)  of  the  ancient  Indian 
social system.  
vajra The vajra is  a  weapon  that  is  as  long  as  a trident carried 
by Indra.  A chihn on Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn’s right  foot.  
Performing dhyãn on  this chihn helps  a bhakta overcome 
his  inner  enemies,  and  removes  the  desires  for  material 
pleasures, which enables the mind to focus on Bhagvãn. 
vãk Voice.  Physical organ of speech (one of the indriyas). 
Vãman An avatãr of Bhagvãn.    He  incarnated  in  the svarup of  a 
dwarf.   Vãman asked  Bali  (demon  king)  to  grant  Him 
three steps of Bali’s kingdom, to which Bali agreed.  With 
the  first  step, Vãman covered  all  of  the  earth.  With  the 
second step, he covered all of the heavens.  With the third 
step, Vãman pushed Bali into Pãtal. 
Vãniyã A   class   of   people   of   the vaishya varna,   traditionally 
engaged in commercial activities. 
vãnprasth ashram Third  of  the  four  stages  of  life,  when  a  person  withdraws 
from  some  social  duties  and  serves  merely  as  an  elderly 
advisor.  Literally implying ‘taking to the forests’. 
van-vicharan Wondering the forest. The pilgrimage of Nilkanth Varni is 
called van vicharan, as He walked through many forests. 
Varãh An avatãr of Bhagvãn.    He  incarnated  in  the svarup of  a 
wild  boar.    Hiranyaksha  was  a  demon  who  stole  the  Veds 
and   drowned   the   earth.    Varãh killed   Hiranyaksha, 
retrieved  the  Veds,  and  saved  the  earth  by  lifting  it  from 
the ocean on his tusks. 
vardãn Blessing.  Gift. 
varna A  caste  of  the  ancient  Indian  social  system:   brãhman, 
kshatriya, vaishya, and sudra. 
vartmãn A vow. 
Varun-Dev The dev of water. 
vãsnã  Desire. A  desire  within  the antah-karans to  enjoy vishays 
that  have  been  previously  seen,  heard,  or  encountered, 
and  those  that have  not  yet  been  encountered. It  remains 

Glossary 
- 867 - 
with  the jeev after  death  of  the  body. The vãsnã must  be 
destroyed in order to attain kalyãn. It can be destroyed by 
performing dhyãn upon Bhagvãn. A  person whose  only 
vãsnã is Bhagvãn is called an ekãntik bhakta. 
Vãsudev 
Vãsudev-Nãrãyan 
One of the four forms of Bhagvãn’s Vishvarup svarup.   His 
role  is  to  be  worshipped  by  the jeevs in  the brahmãnd 
(Virãt-Purush).    The  four-armed svarup of Bhagvãn.    He 
holds  four  different  weapons:   gadã, padma, shankh,  and 
chakra. 
Vãsudev Mahãtmya A  portion  of  the  Skand  Purãn  describing  how  an ekãntik 
bhakta should  offer bhakti to Bhagvãn  while  possessing 
dharma, gnãn and vairãgya.    One  of  the  eight shãstras 
accepted as trustworthy by Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn. 
vãyu Air.    One  of  the  five bhuts,  from  which  the  physical  world 
(Virãt-Purush) is formed.  It causes trees to shake, gathers 
leaves and other objects, carries the panch-vishays (sights, 
sounds,  smells,  tastes,  and  touches)  to  their indriyas,  and 
is the vital force of all of the indriyas. 
Vãyu-Dev The dev of wind and air. 
Ved Knowledge.    Most  sacred  and  respected  set  of shãstras, 
the  oldest  portions  of  which  are  also  recognised  as  the 
most  ancient  writings  in  history.    It  is  a  collection  of 
divine   revelations   imparting   philosophical   wisdom   as 
revealed  to  the rushis after  strict tap and  deep dhyãn.  
Therefore,   the   Veds   are   called Shruti shãstras,   as   the 
knowledge  was  revealed  and  heard.    Consists  of  four 
parts: Rig Ved, Sãm Ved, Yajur Ved, and Atharva Ved. 
Vedãnt A   conclusion   of   the   Veds.      The   principle   of   thought 
explained in the Upanishads, which reveals the conclusive 
teachings of the Veds.  The principle centres on the nature 
of  the ãtmã,  the  world,  reality,  and  personal  experience.  
Although    different ãchãryas have    written    extensive 
commentaries  upon  the  Upanishads  and  proposed  their 
personal  principles  that  can  also  be  called  Vedãnt,  the 
term   is   often   used   specifically   to   refer   to   the   Advait 
philosophy. 
vedãnti A person who promotes or follows the Vedãnt philosophy, 
but  generally  used  for  someone  who  accepts  the  Advait 

Glossary 
- 868 - 
philosophy.  
vedic From the Veds. 
Ved-Stuti A portion of the Shreemad  Bhãgvat (skandh ten) in which 
the Veds praise the glory and greatness of Bhagvãn. 
vidhi The  “do’s”. That   which   morally   should   be   done   (in 
contrast to nishedh). 
Vidur-Niti The  code  of  political  ethics  explained  Vidur,  the  educated 
statesman,  to  his  elder  brother,  Dhrutrãshtra  Rãjã.    It 
forms   portion   of   the   Mahãbhãrat.      One   of   the   eight 
shãstras accepted    as    trustworthy    by Swãminãrãyan 
Bhagvãn. 
vidyã Knowledge of attaining Bhagvãn. 
vidyãdhars A  heavenly  servant  of Indra,  thought  to  live  between  the 
skies and earth. 
vimãn Flying vehicle. 
virãt The physical body of the three bodies of Virãt-Purush and 
other ishvars.    Equivalent  to  the sthul body  of  the jeev.  
[Kãriyãni – 12]. 
Virãt-Purush 1) An ishvar ‘conceived’ by one of the countless pairs of 
Pradhãn-Purush.      A svarup assumed   by Bhagvãn 
through Purush and Prakruti,  and  through  whom  He 
then  grants Brahmã and  other jeevs their  bodies.    By 
nature,  he  is  like  a jeev,  with  his  actions  also  being 
similar  to  that  of  a jeev – but  with  a  lifespan  of  two 
parãrdhs (2   x   10
17
 human   years).      The   creation, 
sustenance,  and  destruction  of  this brahmãnd are  his 
three states.  [Gadhadã II – 31]. 
2) He   is   also   the   physical   world   (Virãt-Purush)   or   a 
brahmãnd,  which  is  a  human  form.    However,  it  is 
beyond  visualisation  due  to  its  immense  size.    Also 
known as Purush-Avatãr.  [Gadhadã I – 63]. 
vishalya-karani An ancient herbal medicine considered to relieve a person 
of  any  stab  wounds  in  the  body  by  causing  the  weapon 
that he has been stabbed with to fall out from the body. 
vishay An  object  indulged  in  by  the jeev through  the  ten indriyas 

Glossary 
- 869 - 
(senses).    The  five  types  of vishays are:    sights,  sounds, 
smells,   tastes,   and   touches   (panch-vishays).      The jeev 
cannot remain without indulging in the vishays.  However, 
vishays related   to Bhagvãn strengthen   the jeev,   while 
vishays related  to  the  world  pollute  the jeev.    The jeev’s 
deep  desire  to  indulge  in  the  pleasures  of  the vishays 
deflects it from the path of kalyãn.  [Gadhadã I – 8]. 
Vishnu The dev of  sustenance.    Part  of  the trimurti.    He  lives  in 
Vaikunth with his wife Lakshmi. 
vishnupad A kirtan written  by  the  great  Vaishnav bhakta Narsinh 
Mehtã,  which  narrates  the charitras of Krishna  Bhagvãn.  
Can  also  refer  to  a  general kirtan of Bhagvãn or  His 
avatãrs. 
Vishnu-Sahasranãm A shãstra praising  the  thousand  sacred  names  of Vishnu.  
One  of  the   eight shãstras accepted  as  trustworthy   by 
Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn. 
Vishnu-Yãg A yagna performed  to  seek  the  blessings  of Vishnu,  and 
Bhagvãn 
vishva Name   of   the jeevãtmã in   the jãgrat state,   when   it   is 
conscious of its sthul body.  [Sãrangpur – 6] 
Vishvarup Literally means ‘svarup of the world’.  This svarup was 
shown  to  Arjun  by Shree Krishna  Bhagvãn.    The svarup 
consists  of  four  different  forms:   Vãsudev, Pradyumna, 
Aniruddha,  and Sankarshan.    They  each  have  different 
roles  and  responsibilities  in  a brahmãnd (Virãt-Purush).  
Sankarshan, Aniruddha,   and Pradyumna are   the sagun 
svarups of Vãsudev Bhagvãn,  and  it  is  the  strength  of  the 
upãsanã of Virãt-Purush that   he   becomes   capable   of 
performing   the   activities   of   creation,   sustenance,   and 
destruction.   Also, as long as Virãt-Purush worships these 
three, his association with Mãyã – in the form of creation, 
sustenance, and destruction – is not broken.  It is when he 
worships Vãsudev Bhagvãn,  who  is nirgun,  that Virãt-
Purush abandons Mãyã and becomes brahm-rup.   
vivek Wisdom.  Discretion.  Carefulness.  Good judgment. 
vrat An observance, usually consisting of an upvãs. 

Glossary 
- 870 - 
vrutti Concentration.    Focus.    The jeev’s vrutti can  be  thought  of 
as  the jeev’s focus  of  attention.    The jeev can  experience 
the  physical  world  (Virãt-Purush)  through  the indriyas.  
Similarly  the jeev can  think  about,  or  have  a  desire  about 
the  world  through  the antah-karans.    When  the jeev’s 
attention   is   focused   on   a   physical   object   through   the 
indriyas,  it  can  be  said  that  the vruttis of  the indriyas are 
focused   on   that   object.      Similarly,   when   the jeev’s 
attention  is  focused  on  an  object  via  the antah-karans,  it 
can   be   said   that   the vruttis of   the antah-karans are 
focused  on  that  object.    Also,  like  the  focus  of  attention, 
the vrutti can  be  focused  on  many  things  at  once  with 
different levels of intensity.  Also, just as the jeev can focus 
its vrutti outwards, it can also focus it inwards on itself or 
on Paramãtmã residing within. 
Vyãs An avatãr of Bhagvãn born  to  Satyavati  and  Parãshar 
Rushi.    Bhagvãn incarnated   in   the svarup of   a   great 
scholar.  Vyãs made  divisions  in  the  Veds,  and  wrote 
eighteen Purãns, including Shreemad Bhãgvat. 
Vyãs Sutra Extremely concise, cryptic sayings, explaining the essence 
of  the  Upanishads,  written  by  Vyãs.    Also  known  as  the 
Brahm  Sutra  or  Vedãnt  Sutra.    One  of  the  eight shãstras 
accepted as trustworthy by Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn. 
vyatirek Separate.    Distinct.    Independent.    Unconnected.    When 
used   for Bhagvãn,   implies   He   is   beyond   everything.  
[Gadhadã I – 7]. 
vyom Space  (ãkãsh);  present  in pruthvi, jal, tej,  and vãyu,  but  it 
remains  unaffected  by  them.    A chihn on Swãminãrãyan 
Bhagvãn’s left  foot.    Similarly,  a bhakta performing dhyãn 
on  this chihn remains  detached  from  the  material  world 
and Bhagvãn resides within the purified space of his heart 
(hruday-ãkãsh).  
Y  
Yagna An avatãr of Bhagvãn.   He incarnated in  the svarup of the 
king  of  the devs,  and  temporarily  replaced Indra.  His 
teaching   was   based   on   the   values   of   helpfulness   and 
protecting each other during the time of crisis. 
yagna Sacrificial  worship.    Ceremonial  ritual  performed  as  a 

Glossary 
- 871 - 
form  of  worship  to  seek  the  good  favour  and  receive  the 
blessings of the devs.  Different items, such as ghee, grains, 
wood,  and  spices,  are  offered  into  a  sacred  pit  of  fire  in 
accordance with strict scriptural niyams with the chanting 
of mantras that are prescribed in the Veds. 
Yãgnavalkya Smruti One  of  the  principal  ancient  Smruti shãstras.    Written  by 
Yãgnavalkya  Rushi.    He  drew on  the  works  of  Manu,  and 
sometimes even paraphrased several of Manu’s verses 
into  his  own  words.    The  teachings  of  the shãstra include 
dharma,  legal  procedures, tyãgis, tap,  and moksh.   One  of 
the eight shãstras accepted as trustworthy by 
Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn. 
yagnopavit A sacred white thread, worn from the left shoulder to the 
waist.  It is worn by brãhmans.  A ceremony (upanayan) is 
performed  when  the yagnopavit is  received,  usually  after 
the   age   of   seven.      Traditionally,   the   ceremony   was 
performed  to  mark  the  point  at  which  boys  began  their 
formal  education.    The yagnopavit is  also  given  to  a sant 
when he receives his dikshã. 
yam Restraint.  First step of ashtãng-yog, which involves moral 
living for purity of mind and unobstructed concentration. 
yamduts The terrifying servants of Yam-Rãj, who punish those who 
have sinned. 
Yampuri The  city  of  Yam-Rãj.    Where nãstiks and  sinners  are  sent 
after death to suffer for their sins at the hands of Yam-Rãj 
and the yamduts.  After suffering for their sins, these jeevs 
continue  to  on  the  cycle  of  births  and  deaths.  Also  called 
Narak. 
Yam-Rãj The dev of  justice.    The  lord  of Yampuri,  who  protects 
dharma by  punishing  those  who  have  sinned.    Also  called 
Dharma-Rãj. 
yati A   person   who   firmly   follows brahm-chãrya and   has 
conquered  all  of  his indriyas should  be  known  as  a yati.  
[Jetalpur – 2]. 
yãtrã Pilgrimage.  Spiritual journey. 
yog The  philosophy  of  focusing  and  quieting  the  fluctuations 

Glossary 
- 872 - 
of    the    mind    through    various    physical    and    mental 
practices,   and   ultimately   aiming   for   the   union   with 
Bhagvãn.  Also called ashtãng-yog. 
yogi 1) A person who has mastered the art of yog. 
2) A   person   who   has   attained siddh-dashã and   other 
extraordinary powers. 
yogic That which is of a yog or yogi.  [Vadtãl – 4]. 
yog-samãdhi Samãdhi attained as a result of perform yog. 
yog-yagna When  a  person  performs  a sãttvik yagna by  withdrawing 
the  ten indriyas and  the  mind  (the  eleventh indriya)  from 
whichever vishays they have become attached to, and then 
offers them into the brahm-agni.  By continuously making 
these   offerings, Bhagvãn incarnates   Himself   with   the 
brahm-svarup self  of  the  person  who  performs  a yoga-
yagna, just as Bhagvãn grants darshan to the performer of 
a yagna.  This is the reward of the yog-yagna. 
yojan Measure of distance equalling four gãus (approximately 3-
4 miles). 
yug Era.    Age.    Division  of  time  used  to  outline  the  time-scale 
of  the  world.    There  are  four yugs:   Satya-Yug (Era  of 
Goodness), Tretã-Yug (Era  of  Three), Dvãpar-Yug (Third 
Era),   and   finally,   the   present   age, Kali-Yug (Era   of 
Darkness).    The dharmas of  the yugs exist  externally  as 
well as internally in the heart.  [Sãrangpur – 9]. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
APPENDIX 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 874 - 
The four purushãrths  
The four goals pursued by all Hindus. 
 
 dharma – the fulfilment of personal, domestic, and social duties. 
 arth – the fulfilment of desires for material objects, such as wealth. 
 kãm – the fulfilment of a person's personal and social desires. 
 moksh – breaking  free  from  the  cycle  of  births  and  deaths,  and  attaining 
Akshardhãm. 
 
 
 The five religious vows (vartmãn) 
Most of the references to the vartmãns in the Vachanãmrut refer to vartmãns of 
sãdhus, which include the vartmãn of grahasthas. 
 
The five religious vows prescribed for sãdhus: 
 nishkãm – vow of celibacy 
 nirlobh – vow of non-greed 
 nisvãd – vow of detachment from the pleasures of taste 
 nisneh – vow of detachment from bodily relations 
 nirmãn – vow of humility 
 
The five religious vows for grahasthas: 
 Do not consume meat 
 Do not consume alcohol 
 Do not steal 
 Do not commit adultery 
 Do not change someone’s dharma of their varna and ashram by force, and do 
not change your own dharma of your varna and ashram. 
 
 
The five great sins (mahã-pãp) 
A person who commits any of these sins will suffer the miseries of Narak. 
 
 brahm-hatya – killing a brãhman 
 madya-pãn – drinking alcohol 
 suvarnani chori – stealing gold or money 
 guru-stri no sang – having illicit relations with the wife of one’s guru 
 charmãhino  sang – company  of  a  person  engaging  in  any  of  the  previous 
four sins 
 
 
 
 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 875 - 
The nine types of bhakti 
 
 shravanam – listening to kathãs or kirtans related to Bhagvãn. 
 kirtanam – singing or talking about Bhagvãn. 
 smaranam – remembering Bhagvãn. 
 pãd-sevanam – massaging Bhagvãn's holy feet. 
 archanam – performing Bhagvãn’s pujã (ãrti, thãl, sandalwood paste) 
 vandanam – bowing before Bhagvãn. 
 dãsyam – behaving as the servant of Bhagvãn. 
 sakhyam – behaving as the friend of Bhagvãn. 
 ãtma-nivedanam – unconditionally offering everything to Bhagvãn. 
 
 
The antah-shatru (inner-enemies) 
These inner enemies must be defeated in order to attain kalyãn. 
 
 kãm 
 krodh 
 lobh 
 moh 
 mãn 
 irshyã 
 asuyã 
 mad 
 matsar 
 ãshã 
 trushnã 
 ahankãr 
 
 
The four types of mukti 
A nishkãm bhakta of Bhagvãn only wishes for His sevã.  He does not desire any 
of the four types of mukti. 
 
 sãlokya – to reside in the dhãm of Bhagvãn 
 sãmeepya – to stay near Bhagvãn 
 sãrupya – to assume a svarup similar to Bhagvãn 
 sãrshti – to attain powers similar to Bhagvãn 
 
 
The eight barriers (asht-ãvaran) 
Eight   barriers   encircle   each brahmãnd,   beyond   which   is   the   divine   light 
Chidãkãsh.  A jeev must cross the eight barriers before it can reach Akshardhãm. 
 
 pruthvi 
 jal 
 tej 
 vãyu 
 ãkãsh 
 maha-tattva 
 Pradhãn 
 Prakruti 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 876 - 
The five eternal entities  
The five eternal entities will never be destroyed. 
 
 jeev 
 ishvar 
 Mãyã 
 Brahm 
 Parbrahm 
  
 
The three gun of Mãyã 
Mãyã is  the  power  of Bhagvãn,  but  is full  of  darkness  and  is  the  source  of 
attachment. 
 
 satva-gun – full of purity, goodness, and awareness 
 rajo-gun – full passion and desires 
 tamo-gun – full darkness, ignorance, and laziness 
 
 
The four parts of the antah-karan 
 
 man – mind; generates thoughts and desires, and governs all of the indriyas 
 buddhi – intelligence; consolidates thoughts, makes decisions, forms beliefs 
 chitt – consciousness; contemplates and thinks  
 ahankãr – ego;  gives  rise  to  the  sense  of  self  and  the  sense  of individual 
existence 
 
 
The twenty-four tattva 
The twenty-four tattvas are the mãyik products of maha-tattva.  The sthul body 
is  composed  of  the  five bhuts,  and  the sukshma body  is  composed  of  the  five 
gnãn-indriyas, the five karma-indriyas, the five prãns, and the four antah-karans. 
 
 five bhut – pruthvi, jal, tej, vãyu, ãkãsh 
 five gnãn-indriyas – shrotra, tvak, chakshu, rasnã, ghran 
 five karma-indriyas – vãk, pãni, pãd, pãyu, upastha 
 five prãns – prãn, apãn, udãn, samãn, vyãn 
 four antah-karans – man, buddhi, chitt, ahankãr 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 877 - 
The five mahã-bhut 
The physical world is created from the five bhut. 
 
 pruthvi – earth 
 jal – water 
 tej – light 
 vãyu – air 
 ãkãsh - space 
 
 
The three bodies (deh) 
Each  embodied  soul  (jeev)  possesses  three  bodies.    A bhakta should  worship 
Bhagvãn,  understanding  his  true  self  as  an ãtmã,  which  is  distinct  from  the 
three bodies. 
 
 sthul body – the physical body, which is the visible body 
 sukshma body – the subtle body, which is the invisible mental body 
 kãran body – the  fundamental  body,  which  stores  the jeev’s karmas and  is 
the cause of rebirth 
 
 
The three mental states of the jeev (avasthã) 
The jeevãtmã indulges in the vishays in three different mental states. 
 
 jãgrat – awake 
 svapna – dream 
 sushupti – deep sleep 
 
 
The five vishay 
The five types of objects that are perceived by the indriyas: 
 
 shabda – sounds 
 sparsh – touches 
 rup – sights 
 ras – tastes 
 gandh – smells 
 
 
The ten indriyas 
The  ten indriyas are  the  senses  that  perceive  the vishays around  them.    Even 
though the indriyas (senses) are distinct from the physical body, each indriya is 
linked to a sense organ.  However, the name given to the indriyas are the names 
of the organs. 
 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 878 - 
five gnãn-indriyas  
 shrotra – ears 
 tvak – skin 
 chakshu – eyes 
 rasnã – tongue 
 ghran – nose 
five karma-indriyas  
 vãk – voice 
 pãni – hands 
 pãd – feet 
 pãyu – anus 
 upastha – genitals 
 
 
The presiding devs 
 
 shrotra (ears) – Digpãl-Dev  
 tvak (skin) – Vãyu-Dev 
 chakshu (eyes) – Surya-Dev  
 rasnã (tongue) – Varun-Dev 
 ghran (nose) – Ashvin-Kumãr-Dev 
 vãk (voice) – Agni-Dev 
 pãni (hands) – Indra 
 pãd (feet) – Vishnu 
 pãyu (anus) – Yam-Rãj 
 upastha (genitals) – Prajãpati 
 
 man (mind) – Chandra 
 buddhi (intelligence) – Brahmã 
 chitt (consciousness) – Vãsudev 
 ahankãr (ego) – Rudra 
 
 
The five prãns 
Life force or energy flowing within the primary life-currents of the body, called 
vãyu,  which  control  crucial  bodily  functions.    They  are  vital  airs  that  evolve 
from rãjas-ahankãr. 
 
 prãn –  forward moving air 
 apãn – air that moves away 
 udãn – upward moving air  
 samãn – balancing air 
 vyãn – outward moving air  
 
 
The four types of bhaktas 
 
 ãrta – a  person  who  is  distressed  after  falling  from  the  path  of  attaining 
siddh-dashã, but still wishes to attain them 
 jignãsu – a person who seeks knowledge of the ãtmã (ãtmã-nisthã) 
 arthãthi – a person who desires material objects, such as material pleasures 
and powers 
 gnãni – a person with gnãn 
 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 879 - 
The eight factors of influence 
If   these   influences   are   pleasant,   they   purify   the   mind;   and   if   they   are   u
npleasant, they pollute the mind. 
 
 desh – place 
 kãl – time 
 kriyã – action 
 sang – company 
 mantra – phrase 
 shãstra – scripture 
 dikshã – initiation 
 dhyãn – mediation 
 
  
The twenty-four svarups of Vishnu 
The  twenty-four svarups forms  of Vishnu are  the  twenty-four  names  given  to 
Vishnu based  on  the  variations  of  the  four  objects  he  holds  in  his  four  hands.  
For  example,  in  the svarup of  Vãsudev,  he  holds  the gadã in  his  lower  right 
hand, and padma in his upper right hand, the shankh in his upper left hand, and 
the chakra in  his  lower  left  hand;  but,  in  the svarup of  Nãrãyan,  he  holds  the 
chakra in  his  lower  right  hand,  the gadã in  his  upper  right  hand,  the padma in 
his upper left hand, and the shankh in his lower left hand. 
 
1. Keshav 
2. Nãrãyan 
3. Mãdhav 
4. Govind 
5. Vishnu 
6. Madhusudan 
7. Trivikram 
8. Vãman 
9. Shridhar 
10. Hrushikesh 
11. Padmanãbh 
12. Dãmodar 
13. Sankarshan 
14. Vãsudev 
15. Pradyumna 
16. Aniruddha 
17. Purushottam 
18. Adhokshaj 
19. Nrusinh 
20. Achyut 
21. Janãrdan 
22. Upendra 
23. Hari 
24. Krishna 
 
 
The avatãrs of Bhagvãn 
Bhagvãn incarnates on Earth for the welfare of society and for the kalyãn of the 
jeevs.   Bhagvãn is  always  present  in Bharat-Khand through  these  incarnations 
or  His sãdhus.    He  assumes  various avatãrs according  to  whichever  task  needs 
to  be  accomplished  in  whichever  place,  and  each avatãr possesses  varying 
amounts  of Bhagvãn’s power.   There  are countless  millions  of avatãrs of 
Bhagvãn, each with varying amounts of Bhagvãn’s power. 
 
Descriptions of many avatãrs are  written  in  the shãstras,  of which  twenty-four 
avatãrs are  considered  to  be  of  most  importance.    From  the  twenty-four 
avatãrs,  ten avatãrs are  considered  as major avatãrs,  with  a  greater  degree  of 
the presence of Bhagvãn than others. 
 
 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 880 - 
The most common list of the twenty-four avatãrs stated in the Purãns are:  
 
1. Sanakãdik  
2. Varãh 
3. Matsya 
4. Hayagriv 
5. Hans 
6. Yagna 
7. Kurma 
8. Dhanvantari 
9. Mohini 
10. Pruthu 
11. Nãrad 
12. Rushabh-Dev 
13. Dattãtrey 
14. Kapil-Dev 
15. Nar-Nãrãyan 
16. Hari 
17. Nrusinh 
18. Vãman 
19. Parshurãm 
20. Vyãs 
21. Rãm 
22. Krishna 
23. Buddh 
24. Kalki 
 
Of these, the ten major avatãrs of Bhagvãn are: 
 
1. Matsya 
2. Kurma 
3. Varãh 
4. Nrusinh 
5. Vãman 
6. Parshurãm 
7. Rãm 
8. Krishna 
9. Buddh 
10. Kalki 
 
 
 
 
 
The eight sat-shãstras 
The   eight shãstras held   as   trustworthy   and   of   special   significance   by 
Swãminãrãyan  Bhagvãn.    He  extracted  the  essence  from  all  these shãstras and 
wrote them in His notebook. 
 
 The Veds 
 The Vyãs Sutra 
 The Shreemad Bhãgvat Purãn 
 The Vishnu-Sahasranãm from Mahãbhãrat 
 The Bhagvad Geetã 
 The Vidur-Niti 
 The Vãsudev Mahãtmya, from the Vishnu-Khand of the Skand Purãn 
 The Yãgnavalkya Smruti 
 
 
The six physical and emotional feelings (shad-urmi) 
 
 thirst 
 hunger 
 grief 
 infatuation 
 old age 
 death 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 881 - 
The nine types of emotions 
The   nine   emotions   are   different   dramatic   moods   that   produce   different 
emotional effects. 
 
 shrungãr – affectionate 
 hãsya – humorous 
 karun – sad 
 vir – heroic 
 raudra – fierce 
 bhayãnak – horrific 
 bibhatsa – vulgar 
 adbhut – wondrous 
 shãnt – tranquil 
 
 
 
The four types of speech 
 
 parã – the divine sound produced in the navel of Virãt-Purush. 
 pashyanti – when  the parã speech  reached  the hruday-ãkãsh of  Virãt,  it 
became known as pashyanti. 
 madhyamã –when  the parã speech  reached  the  throat  of Virãt-Purush,  it 
became known by as madhyamã. 
 vaikhari – when  the parã speech  reached  the  mouth  of Virãt-Purush,  it 
became known as vaikhari. 
 
 
The four weapons carried by Bhagvãn 
 
 shankh – conch shell 
 gadã – mace 
 padma – lotus 
 chakra – razor-bladed disc 
 
 
The four aspects of ekãntik dharma 
 
 dharma – the practice of morality, religious duties and responsibilities 
 bhakti – devotion to Bhagvãn 
 gnãn – knowledge that  lead  to kalyãn;  the  knowledge  of  the ãtmã and the 
svarup and greatness of Bhagvãn. 
 vairãgya – detachment;  a  hatred  or  strong  dislike  for  the  world  and  its 
mãyik pleasures 
 
 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 882 - 
The four types of kusangis 
A person who is bad company is called a kusangi, and they have a bad influence 
on someone’s progress in satsang,  and  leads  them  astray  from satsang.  There 
are four types of kusangis:  
 
 shakti-panthi – They  worship  Shakti,  as  the  governing  power  of  the  world, 
and  they  believe  the  consumption  of  meat  and alcohol  to  be  holy.    Animals 
are sacrificed in front of a murti Shakti, and offered as prasãd. 
 
 kudã-panthi – A follower of a cult whose beliefs are against the teachings of 
the Veds.  They falsely state the five 'M’ as a means to kalyãn.    They  are: 
madya (alcohol), mãns (meat), matsya (fish), mudrã (occult markings on the 
body), and maithun (illicit sex). 
 
 shushka-vedãnti – A  follower  of  the  Advait  philosophy,  proposing  that  the 
ultimate   reality  is  only brahm.   They  deny  the   existence  of  a   personal 
Bhagvãn, His eternally divine svarup, and His dhãm. 
 
 nãstik – An  atheist.    A  person  who  does  not  believe  in  the  existence  of 
Bhagvãn, or who is not religious. 
 
 
The 8.4 million births 
The  cycle  of  births  and  deaths  consists  of  8.4  million  births.   These  births  are 
divided into six categories. 
 
 life-forms that have two arms (human, monkey, bear) – 400,000 births 
 small life-forms (insects) – 1,100,000 births 
 immobile life-forms (trees, plants, mountain) – 2,000,000 births 
 animals (cow, dog, elephant) – 3,000,000 births 
 birds (peacock, pigeon) – 1,000,000 births 
 life-forms that live underwater (fish) – 900,000 births 
 
 
The fourteen loks of Jambu-Dvip 
 
 Satya-Lok 
 Tap-Lok 
 Jan-Lok 
 Mahar-Lok 
 Svarg-Lok 
 Bhuvar-Lok 
 Mrutyu-Lok (earth) 
 Atal 
 Vital 
 Sutal 
 Talãtal 
 Mahãtal 
 Rasãtal 
 Pãtãl 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 883 - 
The eight siddhi powers (asht-siddhi) 
The powers obtained by those who have become a yogi or siddh. 
 
 animã – the ability to make rocks 
 mahimã – the  ability  to  become  large;  a yogi can  become  as  large  as  a 
mountain 
 garimã – the ability to make oneself heavy; a yogi is not moved even by the 
strongest of winds 
 laghimã – the  ability  to  make  oneself  into  light;  the  ability  to  travel  with  a 
ray of light to the lok of Surya 
 ishitva – the  ability  to  create,  sustain,  and  destroy  living  and  non-living 
entities 
 vashitva – the ability to exert control over living and non-living entities 
 prãpti – the ability to grasp; a yogi can fetch objects that may be extremely 
far away 
 prãkãmya – the ability to make wishes come true 
 
 
The eight types of murti 
There are eight types of murtis that are worthy of worship: 
 
 shaili – stone 
 dãrumayi – wood 
 lauhi – metal 
 lepyã – earth or sandalwood paste 
 lekhyã – engraved or drawn 
 saikati – sand 
 manimayi – gems 
 manomayi – mental 
 
 
The seven components of the physical body 
 
 ras – bodily fluids 
 rakta – blood 
 mãns – muscle 
 med – fat 
 asthi – bones 
 majjã – marrow 
 shukra – semen 
 
 
 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 884 - 
The ten topics to realise Bhagvãn 
The ten characteristics of topics of discussion by which Bhagvãn can be realised: 
 
 sarg – creation from maha-tattva to the five bhuts (up to Virãt-Purush) 
 visarg – creation by Brahmã 
 sthãn – supremacy of Bhagvãn in battle 
 poshan – Bhagvãn’s compassion, as He protects the world 
 uti – karma and vãsnã 
 manvantar-kathã – dharma of Manu and the other kings 
 ishãnu-kathã – charitras  of the avatãrs of Bhagvãn and His bhaktas 
 nirodh – dwelling in a subtle form within the various form of Prakruti 
 mukti – renouncing  the svarup of  a dev or  human,  and  residing  in His 
original svarup 
 ãshray – Bhagvãn as the refuge of the creation, sustenance, and destruction 
of the brahmãnd 
 
 
The ten directions 
 
 uttar – north 
 ishãn – northeast 
 purva – east 
 agni – southeast 
 dakshin – south 
 nairutya – southwest 
 pashchim – west 
 vãyavya – northwest 
 urdhva – up 
 adhah – down 
 
 
The six spiritual activities prescribed by Sãnkhya (shat-sampatti)  
 
 sham – tranquillity 
 dam – self-control; restraint of sense organs 
 uparati – abstinence; refraining from mundane objects and activities 
 titikshã – endurance; overcoming comforts and hardships 
 samãdhãn – stability; balance of mind and focus on Bhagvãn 
 shraddhã – faith; persistence 
 
 
 
 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 885 - 
The eight parts of ashtãng-yog 
The practice of ashtãng-yog involves focusing and minimising the fluctuations 
of  the  mind  through  various  physical  and  mental  practices,  and  ultimately 
aiming for the union with Bhagvãn.  There eight progressive steps of ashtãng-
yog.  The first four steps are physical practices, whereas the last four steps are 
mental practices.  
 
1. yam – restraint;    involves    moral    living    for    purity    of    mind    and 
unobstructed concentration. 
2. niyam – observance  of  religious  practices  and  code  of dharma for  the 
control and refinement of the mind. 
3. ãsan – seat   or   posture;      involves   physical   exercises   of   postures   to 
promote concentration. 
4. prãnãyãm – involves  controlling  of prãns through  breathing  exercises 
leading to the calming of the chitt in preparation for concentration. 
5. pratyãhãr – Withdrawal of  sensory  inputs  into  the  physical  body,  that 
enter through five sense organs. 
6. dhãrnã – concentration;  involves  focusing  of  the  mind  to  guide  the  flow 
of consciousness. 
7. dhyãn – meditation;  involves  sustaining  a  concentrated  state  where  the 
mind is clear and calm. 
8. samãdhi – spiritual  experience  of  the  union  with Bhagvãn,  which  is  the 
highest level of yog. 
 
 
 
The four stages of life (ãshram) 
A  person  passes  through  four stages  of  life,  called ãshrams.  They  each  have 
different duties and responsibilities. 
 
 brahm-chãrya – when a person fulfils his duty as a student and brahm-chãri 
 grahastha – when  a  person  enters  married  life  to  fulfil  the  duties  of  a 
householder 
 vãnprasth – when  a person  withdraws  from  some  social  duties  and  serves 
merely as an elderly advisor 
 sannyãs – when a person abandons all worldly duties and lives as a tyãgi 
 
 
The two wings of satsang 
 
 ãgnã – following the commands of Bhagvãn and His sant 
 upãsanã – a firm belief and worship of the sãkãr svarup of Bhagvãn 
 
 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 886 - 
The four social classes (varna) 
All  Hindus  are  divided  into  four  castes.    A  person  must  follow  the dharma of 
their own varna, and should not follow the dharma of another varna. 
 
 brãhman – priest ; a  religious  and  educated  person  traditionally  assigned 
duties of worship, performing rites and rituals, and teaching. 
 kshatriya – warrior ;   a   person   of   power   and   courage,   traditionally 
responsible for  both the formation and enforcement of law within society, 
as well as its safety.  
 vaishya – merchant;  businessman  or  employer  traditionally  dealing  with 
financial and commercial matters in society. 
 shudra – labourer;  skilled  worker  traditionally  serving  the  other  three 
varnas  
 
 
The twenty-nine vrats 
These vrats must  be  kept  by  all bhaktas.    These vrats are  kept  by  Vaishnavs, 
which means ‘twenty-nine; vish-nav’.  
 
 Janmãshtami – the birthday of Shree Krishna 
 Rãmnavmi/Swãminãrãyan  Jayanti – the  birthday  of Shree  Rãm;  and  the 
birthday of Shree Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn 
 Shivrãtri – the  day Shiv returns  to Kailãs,  after  staying in  Pãtãl  four  months 
with Bali Rãjã  
 Vãman Jayanti – the birthday of Shree Vãman 
 Nrusinh Jayanti – the birthday of Shree Nrusinh 
 The 24 Ekãdashi – the eleventh day of the bright and dark halves of the lunar 
month 
 
 
The three qualities of a true satsangi 
 
 niyam – to   follow moral,   spiritual,   and   religious   codes   of   conduct 
prescribed by Bhagvãn or the shãstras 
 nishchay – to  have  unfaltering  faith  in Bhagvãn,  no  matter  what  is  seen or 
heard 
 paksh – to be loyal to Bhagvãn and His bhaktas 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 887 - 
Extra niyams of chãtur-mãs 
During  the  monsoon  season  (chatur-mãs),  a bhakta must  take  extra niyams.  
These are prescribed by Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn in the Shikshãpatri. 
 
 listen to kathãs 
 read kathãs 
 sing kirtans 
 perform a mahã-pujã and the abhishek of Bhagvãn 
 reciting of a mantra  
 reciting of a stotra 
 pradikshanã of the murti of Bhagvãn 
 dandvat pranãm 
 
 
Names Of Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn 
 
 Ghanshyãm – given by Bhakti-Mãtã 
 Hari – given by Mãrkandey Rushi 
 Krishna - given by Mãrkandey Rushi 
 Hari-Krishna - given by Mãrkandey Rushi 
 Nilkanth - given by Mãrkandey Rushi 
 Sahajãnand Swãmi – given by Rãmãnand Swãmi 
 Nãrãyan Muni – given by Rãmãnand Swãmi 
 Swãminãrãyan - – given Himself 
 
 
Items taken on van-vicharan 
Swãminãrãyan  Bhagvãn travelled  all  over  India  for  seven  years,  between  the 
age  of  eleven  and  eighteen.    He  established dharma and  destroyed adharma.  
He carried eleven items with Him: 
 
 mrug-charma – deerskin 
 munj-mekhlã – a grass rope worn around the waist to tie a loin-cloth 
 kamandalu – wooden water pot with a handle 
 batvo – a small box to keep shãligrãms and Bãl-Mukund 
 palãs – a T-shaped wooden stick used as a hand-rest 
 gutko – small notebook containing summaries of shãstras 
 gãranu – cotton cloth to filter water 
 mãlã – rosary 
 bhikshã-pãtra – bowl for alms 
 yagnopavit – sacred thread worn from left shoulder to waist 
 tulsi kanthi – double-threaded necklace made of tulsi beads 
 
 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 888 - 
The major pilgrimage places visited by Nilkanth Varni on van-vicharan 
 
 Pulãshram (Mukti-Nãth) 
 Shirpur 
 Nav-Lakhã Mountain 
 Bãlvã-Kund 
 Kapil-Ãshram 
 Jagan-Nãth-Puri 
 Shiv Kanchi 
 Vishnu Kanchi 
 Shree-Rang Kshetra 
 Setubhandh Rãmeshvar 
 Bhut-Puri 
 Kumãrikã  
 Padmanãbh 
 Janãrdan 
 Ãdi Keshav 
 Pandharpur 
 Dand-Kãranya 
 Nãsikpur 
 Trambakeshvar 
 River Tãpi 
 River Narmadã 
 River Mahi 
 River Sãbarmati 
 Bhim-Nãth 
 
 
The six mandirs 
Six  mandirs  were  constructed  by  the  wish  of Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn,  and  He 
installed the murtis Himself. 
 
Place Murti Year Head of Construction 
Amdãvãd Nar-Nãrãyan Dev VS 1878  Ãnandãnand Swãmi 
Bhuj Nar-Nãrãyan Dev VS 1879  Vaishnavãnand Swãmi 
Vadtãl Lakshmi-Nãrãyan Dev VS 1881  Brahmãnand Swãmi 
Dholerã Madan-Mohanji Mahãrãj VS 1882  Nishkulãnand Swãmi 
Junãgadh Rãdhã-Raman Dev VS 1884  Brahmãnand Swãmi 
Gadhadã Gopinãthji Mahãrãj VS 1885  Viraktãnand Swãmi 
 
 
The five authors of the Vachanãmrut 
The  Vachanãmrut  contains  the  words  spoken  by Swãminãrãyan  Bhagvãn.  
However,  it  was  written  and  compiled  by  five sants,  after  hours  of  listening, 
remembering, and writing.  
 
 Muktãnand Swami 
 Gopãlãnand Swami 
 Nityãnand Swami 
 Shukãnand Swãmi 
 Brahmãnand Swami 
 
After  each sabhã,  the sants would  write  down  the  discussions  of  the sabhã.  
They  would  then  merge  their  scripts,  to  finally  create  one  final  manuscript.  
Even    though Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn held    thousands    of sabhãs,    the 
discussions from only 273 are included in the Vachanãmrut. 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 889 - 
The eight body parts of ashtãng dandvat pranãm 
Men perform ashtãng pranãm with eight parts of their body, whereas women 
perform panchãng pranãm with  five  parts  of  the  body.    These  body  parts  are 
offered to Bhagvãn when bowing before Him. 
 
ashtãng-pranãm 
 feet  
 hands 
 thighs  
 chest 
 head  
 eyes 
 mind  
 speech  
panchãng pranãm 
 head 
 hands  
 feet  
 mind  
 speech 
 
 
 
 
The five ãrti of the day 
 
 mangalã – performed before sunrise, when Bhagvãn wakes up 
 shangãr – performed after Bhagvãn is dressed 
 rãjbhog – performed before lunch 
 sandhyã – performed after sunset 
 shayan – performed before bedtime 
 
 
The five parts of panch-amrut 
A mixture of five items is used in pujã and for the abhishek of Bhagvãn. 
 
 dudh – milk 
 dahi – yoghurt 
 ghee – pure butter 
 madh – honey 
 sãkãr – sugar 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 890 - 
The thirty-nine characteristics of Bhagvãn as a king 
 
1. satya – truthfulness; kindness to all beings 
2. sauch – inner purity; flawlessness 
3. dayã – compassion; intolerance of the pain of others 
4. kshãnti – patience; tolerance of contempt from enemies 
5. tyãg – renunciation; abandoning all things 
6. santosh – happiness; free from impatience 
7. ãrjav – sincerity; honesty; harmonising of mind, speech, and body 
8. sham – tranquillity 
9. dam – self-control; restraint of outer sense organs 
10. tap – strictness 
11. sãmya – equality; equal behaviour with friends and foe 
12. titikshã – endurance; withstanding comforts and hardships 
13. uparati – self-discipline; refraining from unnecessary activities 
14. shrut – learning; knowledge of precise meanings of the shãstras 
15. gnãn – knowledge useful in helping a mumukshu  attain the pleasant and 
avoid the unpleasant 
16. virakti –repulsion towards the pleasures of the senses 
17. aishvarya – power; control over all things 
18. shaurya – valour; courage in battle 
19. tej – brilliance; resistance to defeat 
20. bal – strength; power to govern all beings 
21. smruti – memory; remembering of bhaktas 
22. svãtantrya – independence 
23. kaushal – skilled 
24. kãnti – splendour 
25. dhairya – courage 
26. mãrdav – gentleness 
27. prãgalbhya – maturity 
28. prasharay – courteous; polite 
29. sheel – pure 
30. saha – strength; force 
31. ojas – vitality; energetic 
32. bal – strength; power to support all things 
33. bhag – excellence 
34. gãmbheerya – wisdom 
35. sthairya – stability 
36. ãstikya – faith in Bhagvãn and shãstras 
37. keerti – glory; fame 
38. mãn – self-respect 
39. anahankruti – without ego; humility 
 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 891 - 
The thirty characteristics of a sãdhu 
 
1. krupãlu – selflessly showers grace upon others 
2. sarvedehinãm akrutadroh – does not harm any living being 
3. titikshu – remains  dignified  in  all situations – during  praise  and  insult, 
happiness and misery 
4. satyasãr – strength comes from satya 
5. anavadhyãtmã – devoid of jealousy or other such vices 
6. sam – views others with equality 
7. sarvopakãrak – does only good to others 
8. kãmairahatadhihi – not disturbed by indulging in vishays 
9. dãnt – indriyas are restrained  
10. mrudu – gentle-natured 
11. shuchi – inner and outer purity 
12. akinchan – without any worldly desires 
13. aniha – without any desires for worldly gains 
14. mitabhuk – eats in moderation 
15. shãnt –  mind is restrained 
16. sthir – composure 
17. machharan – only refuge is Bhagvãn 
18. muni – has noble thoughts 
19. apramatta – aware 
20. gambhriãtmã – motives are beyond our understanding 
21. dhrutimãn – patient even in difficult circumstances 
22. jitashadgun – one who has defeated:  thirst, hunger, grief, infatuation, old 
age, and death 
23. amãni – humility 
24. mãnad – can praise others 
25. kalp – ability to speak for the benefit others 
26. maitra – does not deceive others 
27. kãrunik – compassionate without any selfish motive 
28. kavi – fully knows the sthãvar, the jangam, and Bhagvãn 
29. worships Bhagvãn 
30. has  single-minded  worship  with  the  realisation  of Bhagvãn in  His  true 
glory 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 892 - 
The chihn on the feet of Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn 
 
Right Foot  
jav A barley grain; located on the right toe.  Performing dhyãn on this 
chihn destroys all sins, purifies the mind, and grants a person with 
the  knowledge  of ãtmã and Paramãtmã.    It  also  grants  worldly 
wealth and comforts. 
jãmbu A  berry.    Performing dhyãn on  this chihn ensures  that  a bhakta 
loses  interest  in  everything  else  and  feels  that  all  worldly  affairs 
are worthless. 
vajra The vajra is  a  weapon  as  long  as  a trident which  is  carried  by 
Indra.   Performing dhyãn on  this chihn helps  a bhakta overcome 
his inner enemies, and removes the desires for material pleasures, 
which enables the mind to focus on Bhagvãn. 
urdhva- 
rekhã 
Line.   This chihn runs  from the space  between the big toe and the 
first  toe  to  the  heel  of  the  right  foot.   Performing dhyãn on  this 
chihn spiritually   elevates   the   mind   and   takes   the bhakta to 
Akshardhãm. 
dhvaj A  flag.    A  flag  sits  above  a mandir,  and  is  also  carried  by  the  chief 
warrior  of  an  army.    A  flag  also  symbolises  victory.   Performing 
dhyãn on this chihn leads a bhakta to live by the ãgnã of Bhagvãn, 
just as a flag flutters according to the direction of the wind.  It also 
helps a bhakta overcome lust and other material desires. 
kamal A  lotus.   Performing dhyãn on  this chihn enables  a bhakta to 
remain   free   of   material   attachments   and   focus   his   mind   on 
Bhagvãn.  Just as a kamal is able to blossom even in muddy water, 
similarly,  a bhakta is  able  to  remain  free  of  material  attachments, 
despite  fulfilling  all  his  worldly  duties  obligations.   Also,  just  as  a 
kamal does not sink into water, a bhakta is not submerged by  the 
forces of inner enemies, attachments, and material pleasures. 
ankush An  instrument  used  to  control  an  elephant.   Performing dhyãn on 
this chihn enables  a bhakta to  control  his  mind,  and  to  become 
strong in worshipping Bhagvãn. 
ashtakon An  octagon.    Performing dhyãn on  this chihn grants  a bhakta the 
fruits   of ashtãng-yog.      He   also   attains Akshardhãm,   which   is 
beyond the eight barriers. 

Appendix A – Satsang Information 
 
- 893 - 
svastik This sacred sign symbolises the focusing of Bhagvãn’s energy from 
all  four  directions  to  the  centre.   Performing dhyãn on  this chihn 
grants the bhakta a happy life free of misery, and good luck. 
  
Left Foot  
matsya A  fish.   Performing dhyãn on  this chihn grants  a bhakta with  a 
stable  mind.    It  also  empowers  him  to  live  life  absorbed  in  the 
murti of Bhagvãn. 
trikon A triangle.  Performing dhyãn on this chihn frees a bhakta from the 
bondage  and  the  three  bodies – sthul,  sukshma,  kãran; and  the 
three mental states – jãgrat, svapna; sushupti.  He becomes brahm-
rup. 
gaupad A cow’s footprint.  Performing dhyãn on this chihn causes the vast 
material world to become the size of a cow’s hoof. 
dhanush A  bow;  symbolises  humility  and  strength.   Performing dhyãn on 
this chihn makes  a bhakta humble,  wise,  polite,  and  fearless.    It 
also enables him to overcome inner enemies. 
vyom Space  (ãkãsh);  present  in pruthvi, jal, tej,  and vãyu,  but  it  remains 
unaffected  by  them.  Similarly,  a bhakta performing dhyãn on  this 
chihn remains  detached  from  the  material  world,  and Bhagvãn 
resides within the purified space of his heart (hruday-ãkãsh).  
ardha-
chandra 
Half  moon.    The  moon  symbolises  peace.    A bhakta performing 
dhyãn on this chihn overcomes all miseries and  experiences inner 
peace   and   profound   happiness.      Also,   just   as   the   night-lotus 
blossoms  due  to  the  light  of  the  moon,  the bhakta blossoms  with 
bhakti and shraddhã through the light of Bhagvãn. 
kalash A  brass  water-pot.    By performing dhyãn on  this chihn a bhakta 
attains total fulfilment and becomes akshar-rup.  A kalash occupies 
the  highest  point  on  the shikhar of  a mandir, and  so  the bhakta 
attains the highest dhãm, Akshardhãm. 

Appendix B – Biography Of Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn 
 
- 894 - 
The Purpose Of His Avatãr 
 
Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn incarnated on earth, along with His dhãm and some of 
His muktas,  to  establish ekãntik dharma,  and  grant kalyãn to  those  who 
became  His bhaktas.  He  incarnated  at  Dharma-Dev’s house in Chhapaiyã in 
Kaushal-Desh,  to  save  Bhakti-Mãtã  and Dharma-Dev  from  harassment  by 
demons.    He  also  incarnated  to  take mumukshu bhaktas to Akshardhãm,  by 
imparting knowledge of His svarup, dharma, vairãgya, and bhakti. 
 
While  on  earth,  He established ekãntik dharma,  which  had  been  destroyed 
many years ago, and He destroyed adharma.  He initiated over 2000 sãdhus, of 
which  500  were  initiated  as paramhans.    Also,  He  built mandirs,  and  installed 
murtis,  which  will  always  remain  on  earth.   In  this  way, Bhagvãn forever 
resides  on  this  earth  through  His sãdhus and  His murtis.   Swãminãrãyan 
Bhagvãn also wrote and narrated shãstras, authenticated ancient shãstras, and 
instructed His sãdhus to write shãstras. 
 
Birth Name: Ghanshyãm (given by Bhakti-Mãtã) 
 
Other Names:  Hari, Krishna, Hari-Krishna, Nilkanth  
  (given by Mãrkandey Rushi in Chhapaiyã) 
 Sahajãnand Swãmi, Nãrãyan Muni 
  (given by Rãmãnand Swãmi in Piplãnã) 
 Swãminãrãyan 
  (given by Himself in Faneni) 
 Shreeji Mahãrãj 
  (given by His bhaktas) 
 
Birth Date:  Chaitra sud 9, VS 1837 (2
nd
 April 1781) - Rãmnavmi 
Birthplace: Chhapaiyã, near Ayodhyã in Kaushal-Desh 
 (later moved to Ayodhyã) 
 
Father’s Name:  Dharma-Dev (Dev-Sharma) 
 (son of Bãl-Sharma and Bhãgyavati) 
Father’s Birth Date: Kãrtik sud 11, VS 1796 
Father’s Birthplace: Itãr 
 
Mother’s Name: Bhakti-Mãtã (Bãlã, Premvati) 
 (daughter of Krishna-Sharma and Bhavãni) 
Mother’s Birth Date: Kãrtik sud 15, VS 1798 
Mother’s Birthplace: Chhapaiyã 
 
 

Appendix B – Biography Of Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn 
 
- 895 - 
Brothers: Rãmpratãpji (married to Suvãsini-Bãi) 
 Ichhãrãmji (married to Variyãri-Bãi) 
 
Varna: Sarvariya Brahman 
Family Ved: Sãm Ved, Kauthmi Shãkhã 
 
Guru: Rãmãnand Swami 
 
 
Van-Vicharan 
Start date: Ãshãdh sud 10, VS 1849 – the day he left Ayodhyã 
Age at start:  11 years, 3 months, and 1 day 
Place: Ayodhyã 
 
Length of van-vicharan:  7 years, 1 month, and 11 days 
 
End date:  Shrãvan vad 6, VS 1856 
Age at end:  18 years, 4 months, and 12 days 
Place: Loj    
 
 
Bhãgvati Dikshã 
Age: 19 years, 7 months, and 2 days 
Date: Kãrtik sud 11, VS 1857 
Place: Piplãnã 
 
 
Head Of The Sampradãy 
Age: 20 years, 7 months, and 2 days 
Date: Kãrtik sud 11, VS 1858  
Place: Jetpur 
 
 
Satsang 
Years in satsang: 30 years, 9 months, and 19 days  
 
Time on earth: 49 years, 2 months, and 1 day 
Date He left earth: Jyeshth sud 10, VS 1886 
 
 
 
 
 

Appendix B – Biography Of Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn 
 
- 896 - 
Accomplishments On Earth 
 
 Established ekãntik dharma, and destroyed adharma 
 Initiated over 2000 sãdhus, of which 500 were initiated as paramhans  - He 
remains on earth through these sãdhus 
 Built mandirs, and installed murtis for bhaktas to always have the darshan 
of Bhagvãn’s murti  
 Established two seats of leadership (gãdi), and two ãchãryas to protect and 
promote the sampradãy 
 Revealed the philosophy of the Veds in simple words 
 Wrote shãstras, and authenticated ancient shãstras, and shãstras written by 
His sãdhus 
 Summarised the essence of all the shãstras in the Shikshãpatri 
 
 Worked to assist the poor by distributing food and drinking water  
 Opened charity-houses for the poor 
 Organised food and water aid for people during times of drought 
 
 Stopped the practice of sati, as it was suicide/murder (some were forced) – 
human life is only given and taken by Bhagvãn 
 Stopped female infanticide (killing of baby girls) 
 Encouraged the bhaktas to educate females, which meant they were able to 
give talks about Bhagvãn 
 Stopped the sacrifice of animals in yagnas 
 
 Allowed   members   from   all varnas (castes)   into   the   Swãminãrãyan 
Sampradãy;  He instructed His paramhans to collect alms from all sections 
of  society  and  appointed  people  from  the  lower varnas of  society  as  His 
personal   attendants;   He   ate   along   with   members   of   lower varnas.  
However, taking food from members of lower varnas was not supported by 
Him. 
 
 Dispelled  the  myth  that moksh was  not  attainable  by  everyone.    He  taught 
mumukshu bhaktas that the jeev is  neither  male  nor  female  and  that 
everyone is equal in the eyes of Bhagvãn 
 
 Had  good  relationships  with  the  British  Imperial  Government,  so  they 
gifted Him with land to build a mandir in Amdãvãd 
 Maintained   good   relationships   with   people   of   other religions;   had 
followers  from  other  religions;  even  though  some  of  His  attendents were 
Muslims, they wore a kanthi and followed the panch-vartmãn 
 Gave the Governor of Bombay, Sir john Malcolm, a copy of the Shikshãpatri 
(is kept in Bodleian Library in Oxford) 
 

Appendix C – Introductory Paragraphs 
- 897 - 
The  introductory  paragraph  of  each  Vachanãmrut  begins  with  the  date  and 
location,  which takes  the  reader  back in  time  to  the  exact  environment  in 
which  the sabhãs were  held.    This  is  followed  by  a  detailed  description  of 
Shreeji Mahãrãj’s svarup,  which allows  the  readers  and  listeners  to visualise 
Him   sitting   in   the sabhã,   giving   His   spiritual   talks   to   the sãdhus and 
haribhaktas. 
 
Garments 
 
Garment Description 
angarkhu A long-sleeved,  upper  garment  that  is  made  of  a  thin  cloth.  It 
reaches  down  to  the  knees,  and  is  tied  with  strings  on  the  left 
side of the chest. 
bokãni Cloth tied around the head, with one end crossing from under the 
chin to cover the ears and cheeks. 
chãdar A thin blanket. 
dagli Waistcoat   with   inner   lining.   Shorter   and   thicker   than   an 
angarkhu. 
dhoti An  unstitched,  long  piece  of  cloth  traditionally  worn  by  males  as 
a  lower  garment.    It  is  usually  wound  around  the  waist  with  one 
end tucked in after passing it between the legs. 
feto Long piece of cloth that can be twisted and tied around the head, 
or placed over the shoulder and tied around the waist. 
jãmo A long-sleeved, upper garment that is made of a thick cloth, with 
rich  embroidery.  It  reaches down  below  the  knees,  and  is  tied  at 
the waist with long strings. 
khes Piece  of  cloth  that  can  be  worn  as  a  shawl  to  cover  the  upper 
body, or worn as a dhoti to cover the lower body. 
pãgh Turban. Long, thin piece of cloth tied around the head.. 
rajãi Thick blanket. 
reto Feto, moliyu or shelu with  silky,  decorative  edges  woven  with 
golden or silver threads.  Tied around the head or waist, or left to 
rest upon the shoulders. 
shelu Rich fabric with a silky finish woven with golden or silver threads 
and decorative  edges.      It  is  worn  as  an  upper  garment  or  tied 
around the head or waist, or even left to rest upon the shoulders. 
survãl Loose trousers. 
 
 

Appendix C – Introductory Paragraphs 
- 898 - 
Garments worn in cold weather 
Mahãrãj wore warm clothes during the winter.  For example, during the kathã 
in Gadhadã I – 24, He wore a warm dagli.  Also, in Loyã 1, Loyã 3, and Loyã 7, 
Shreeji Mahãrãj wore a cotton-padded survãl.  From all the garments worn by 
Shreeji   Mahãrãj,   we   can   deduce    that   the   three    coldest   days   in   the 
Vachanãmrut may have been in Loyã, as Mahãrãj wore double layers on top of 
His warm dagli. 
 
The three coldest days: 
Loyã Day Garments 
15 Mãgshar vad 13 
a  warm dagli, khes, feto around  His  head,  tied  a 
bokãni with  another feto,  covered  Himself chofãl 
and a pachhedi 
17 
Mãgshar vad 
Amãs 
a warm dagli with an angarkhu inside, khes, tied a 
feto around  his  head,  tied bokãni with  another 
feto, covered Himself chofãl and a rajãi 
18 Posh sud 1 
a  warm dagli, khes,    tied  a feto around  his  head, 
tied bokãni with  another feto,  covered  Himself 
chofãl and a rajãi 
 
Notes: 
 As Shreeji Mahãrãj possessed intense vairãgya,  He preferred simple white 
clothing. 
 
 Shreeji Mahãrãj generally wore a dhoti, referred to as a khes.  A white dhoti 
is  only  mentioned twice in  the  Vachanãmrut,  in  Gadhadã  II – 34 and  in 
Jetalpur – 5. 
 
 He rarely wore a survãl, but when He did, He preferred a white one, rather 
than  one  made  of kinkhãb.    He  only  wore  a kinkhãb  survãl when  it  was 
presented by a loving bhakta. 
 
 He  rarely  wore  an angarkhu, dagli,  or jãmo.    He  usually  draped  one  of  the 
following garments on His upper body: thin cotton cloth, thick cotton cloth, 
chãdar, khes, reto, or shelu. 
 
 Shreeji Mahãrãj rarely wore rich garments with embroidery. 
 
 He wore a white, English-milled cloth during the kathã in Gadhadã III – 31. 
 
 

Appendix C – Introductory Paragraphs 
- 899 - 
Adornments 
 
The paramhans and bhaktas often  adorned  Mahãrãj  with  various  items.  They 
offered  Him   flowers,  hung  garlands  around  His  neck,  placed  bunches  of 
flowers above His ears or inserted them into His pãgh, hung tassels of flowers 
from His pãgh, and tied strings of flowers to His wrists and arms. 
 
Adornments Vachanãmrut 
berkhã (string   of   flowers 
tied to the wrist) 
Gadhadã I – 30 
bãjubandh and gajarã Vadtãl – 1, Amdãvãd – 2, 4, Gadhadã III – 1, 3, 5, 9 
guchh (bunches  of flowers 
placed above the ears) 
Gadhadã 1 – 12, 20, 22, 34, 36, 37, 39, 41, 42, 43 
Sãrangpur 14, Gadhadã II – 21, 32, Vadtãl – 5 (two on 
each ear) 
Amdãvãd – 1, 4, 6, Jetalpur – 3 
both torã and     garlands 
hanging on Mahãrãj’s pãgh 
Gadhadã I – 62, Gadhadã II – 49, Amdãvãd – 3 
held in the hands: 
- gajarã 
- large bunch of roses 
- bunch of flowers 
- a ball of flowers 
- sevati flower in right hand 
- pomegranate 
- lemon 
- handkerchief 
- tulsi mãlã 
 
Gadhadã I – 49 
Amdãvãd – 6 
Gadhadã I – 14 
Gadhadã I – 36 
Gadhadã I – 14 
Vadtãl – 13, Jetalpur – 3  
Jetalpur 1, 3 
Jetalpur – 2 
Gadhadã I –70, Panchãlã –4, Amdãvãd –5, Jetalpur –2 
 tulsi kanthi Gadhadã I – 64, Gadhadã II – 48 
rãkhadis Gadhadã II – 9 
(Shrãvan sud 14, one day before Rakshã Bandhan) 
pearl    necklace    and    pearl 
tassels hanging from pãgh 
Gadhadã I – 13 
sandalwood  paste  smeared 
on forehead 
Gadhadã I – 32, 59 
sandalwood  paste  smeared 
on whole body 
Jetalpur – 4 
 
 
 

Appendix C – Introductory Paragraphs 
- 900 - 
Flowers Vachanãmrut 
chameli Vadtãl – 20, Amdãvãd – 3, 6, Jetalpur – 3 
mogrã Gadhadã II – 21, 24, 54, 61, Gadhadã III – 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 13, 15, 16, 
19 
dolariyã Jetalpur 1, 2, 3 
gulãb Gadhadã I – 14, 63, Vadtãl 1, 3, 5, 12, Amdãvãd 1, 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 
hajãri Jetalpur – 3 
borsali Jetalpur – 3 
guldãvadi/sevati Gadhadã  I – 14,  22,  26,  Kãriyãni – 11,  Gadhadã  II – 27,  66, 
Jetalpur – 1, 3, 4 
champã Vadtãl – 2, Jetalpur – 3 
karnikãr Gadhadã I – 36, Gadhadã II – 14, Gadhadã III – 19 
 
Notes: 
 There  are  no  flowers  in  the  Panchãlã sabhãs,  either  because  the  area  was 
not  fertile  enough  for  growing  flowers  or  the  weather  in Fãgan was  not 
warm enough for flowers to grow. 
 
 There  are  no  flowers  in  the  Loyã sabhãs.    This  may  be  due  to  the  cold 
winter.  Also, there are no flowers in winter months of Gadhadã II, until the 
month Chaitra. 
 
 The rose only appears twice in the sabhãs in Gadhadã.  Roses probably did 
not  grow  in  the  Saurãshtra  region.    So,  the  roses  in  the  two sabhãs may 
have  been  brought  by bhaktas visiting  from  other  regions.    All  the  other 
references  to  roses  occur  in  the  Gujarat sabhãs (Vadtãl  and  Amdãvãd).    In 
the Amdãvãd sabhãs, Mahãrãj adorns roses in the form of torã, bãjubandh, 
guchh, and garlands. 
 
 The dolariyã flower only appears in the Jetalpur kathãs. 
 
 In  Jetalpur  3,  Mahãrãj  adorns  six  varieties  of  flowers: champã, borsali, 
guldãvadi, chameli, dolariyã,  and hajãri,  in  addition  to  holding  a  lemon  in 
one hand and a pomegranate in the other. 
 
 Sandalwood  paste  is  usually  applied  during  the  summer  months  for  its 
cooling  effect.    In  the  Vachanãmrut,  it  was  smeared  on  Mahãrãj  three 
times: one during the month of Posh, and twice during the month of Fãgan.  
Both  months  have  low  temperatures,  with Posh being  colder  than Fãgan.  
Therefore, Mahãrãj may have accepted the sandalwood from a great sãdhu 
or a devout bhakta, as it is only soothing during the summer months. 

 
 
 
 
-
 
901
 
-
 
Place 
 
 
Number 
of 
Chapters 
Talks 
given by 
Shreeji 
Mahãrãj 
of His 
own 
accord 
NUMBER OF QUESTIONS ASKED 
Shreeji Mahãrãj
 
Muktãnand
 
Swãmi
 
Gop
ã
l
ã
nand
 
Swami
 
Nityãnand
 
Sw
ã
mi
 
Shuk
ã
nand
 
Sw
ã
mi
 
Brahmãnand
 
Swami
 
Other Sant
 
Ayodhya Prasadji
 
Mahãrãj
 
Raghuvirji
 
Mahãrãj
 
Haribhaktas
 
Gadhadã I 78 40 22 32 5 4 3 8 41 - - 17 
Sãrangpur 18 6 4 12 - 4 - - 15 - - 2 
Kãriyãni 12 5 7 5 2 3 - 2 8 - - 2 
Loyã 18 3 47 8 2 - 3 3 15 - - 1 
Panchãlã 7 5 1 - - - - - 2 - - 1 
Gadhadã II 67 46 31 17 - 2 2 2 8 1 1 3 
Vadtãl 20 5 8 4 1 1 1 1 - - - 11 
Amdãvãd 8 3 3 1 - - 1 - - - - 7 
Ashlãli 1 1 - - - - - - - - - - 
Jetalpur 5 4 1 1 - - - 1 - - - 1 
Gadhadã III 39 44 17 11 1 - 11 - 7 1 1 6 
Appendix 
D
 
–
 
Questions
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
  
 
Purushottam 
Akshar 
mukta mukta 
mukta mukta mukta mukta 
mukta mukta 
Mul-Purush 
(mukta) 
Mul-Prakruti 
(Mahã-Mãyã) 
mukta 
Pradhãn-Purush 
maha-tattva 
(chitt) 
Appendix 
E
 
–
 
Creation
 

 
 
 
-
 
903
 
-
 
sãttvik-ahankãr rãjas-ahankãr tãmas-ahankãr 
Virat Purush 
(24 tattvas) 
Brahmã 
Marichi Prajãpati 
Kashyap Prajãpati 
devs 
humans, animals, 
trees, mountains 
demons 
man 
devs of the indriyas 
ten indriyas 
buddhi 
prãns 
five bhut 
five tanmãtrãs (vishays) 

 
 
-
 
904
 
-
 
     
 
 
      
 
 
      
  
10 – Svarg-Lok 
9 – Bhuvar-Lok 
7 – Atal 
6 - Vital 
5 - Sutal 
4 - Talãtal 
3 – Mahãtal 
8 – Mrutyu-Lok 
2 – Rasãtal 
1 – Pãtãl 
Night (12 hours) 
Nimit-Pralay 
(lower ten loks 
are destroyed) 
365 
DAYS 
Brahmã 
(100-year lifespan) 
12 HOURS 
                    
  
  
  
  
  
    
1                                                                        12 
100 
YEARS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Appendix 
F
 
–
 
Time Scale
 

 
 
-
 
905
 
-
 
 
 Brahmã lives  for  100  years  (3.1536  x  10
14
 human  years).  Each  year  is  made  up  of  365 days.    At  the  end  of  his  100-year  lifespan, 
prãkrut-pralay occurs,  in  which  the  whole brahmãnd (the  14 loks)  is  destroyed.    A  new brahmãnd is  then  created,  with  a  new 
Brahmã. 
 
 Brahmã’s whole day is made up of 24 hours: a 12-hour day and a 12-hour night (8.64 x 10
9
 human years). 
 
 During Brahmã’s day, the lower 10 loks of the brahmãnd are created; and they are destroyed during the night.  This is called nimit-
pralay.  The lower 10 loks are then created the next day. (The upper four loks are created during Brahmã’s first day, and they are 
not destroyed until Brahmã dies, and prãkrut-pralay occurs) 
 
 During Brahma’s 12-hour day (4.32 x 10
9
 human years), 14 Manus and Indras reign and die, and 1000 Mahã-Yugs (chokadis) occur. 
 
 A chokadi is  the  passing  of  four yugs: Satya-Yug lasts  for  1,728,000  human  years; Tretã-Yug lasts  for  1,296,000  human  years; 
Dvãpar-Yug lasts for 864,000 human years; and Kali-Yug lasts for 432,000 human years.  This means one chokadi is completed in 
4,320,000 human years.  Therefore, 1000 Mahã-Yugs occur during one day of Brahmã.  The destruction that occurs during the day 
of Brahmã is called nitya-pralay. 
 
1000 Mahã-Yug 
(chokadi) 
3 1 
2 
500 
1000 
998 
999 
Satya-Yug 
1,728,000 human years 
Tretã-Yug 
1,296,000 human years 
Dvãpar-Yug 
864,000 human years 
Kali-Yug 
432,000 human years 

Appendix G – Conversion of Measurements 
 
- 906 - 
 In   the    Vachanãmrut, Swãminãrãyan Bhagvãn has    referred   to   various 
measurements  of  time  using  traditional  Hindu  time  scales.    Below  is  a  list  of 
Indian time measurements with modern conversion equivalents.  
 
1 krati 34,000
th
 of a second 
1 truti 300
th
 of a second 
2 truti 1 luv (1/150 of a second) 
2 lav 1 kshan (1/75 of  a second) 
30 kshan  1 nimish (2/5 of a second) 
60 nimish 1 pal (24 second) 
60 pal 1 ghadi (24 minutes) 
2.5 ghadi 1 horã (1 hour) 
24 horã 1 diwas (1 day) 
7 diwas 1 saptãsh (1 week) 
4 saptã 1 mãs (1 month) 
2 mãs 1 rutu (1 season) 
6 rutu 1 varsh (1 year) 
100 varsh 1 shatãbda (1 century) 
10 shatãbda 1 sahasrãbda (1,000 years) 
432 sahasrãbda 1 yug (length of Kali-Yug, 432,000 years) 
2 yug 1 Dvãpar-Yug (864,000 years) 
3 yug 1 Tretã-Yug (1,296,000 years) 
4 yug 1 Satya-Yug (1,728,000 years) 
10 yug 1 Mahã-Yug = 1 chokdi (4,320,000 years) 
1000 mahã-yug 1 kalp (4,320,000,000 years) 
1 kalp 4.32 billion years 
 
 
 

Appendix H – Hindu Calendar 
 
- 907 - 
 The Hindu  calendar  year  is  based  on  the  Vikram  era,  after  King  Vikram  of 
Ujjain.    The  system  is  still  widely  used  in  Northern  and  Western  India.    The 
calendar began in 57-56 BCE. 
 
 The  twelve  months  of  the  year  are  lunar-based,  where  each  month is divided 
into the bright half (waxing of the moon), known as the ‘shukla’ or ‘sud’, and 
the dark half (waning of the moon), known as the ‘krishna’ or ‘vad paksh’.  The 
15
th
 day  of  the sud half  (full  moon),  is  known  as Punam,  while  the  last  day  of 
vad half (new moon), is known Amãs. 
 
In  Northern  India,  the  months  end  on  the  day  of  the  full  moon,  while  in 
Gujarãt,  the  months  end  on  Amãs,  the  darkest  night.   The lunar  calendar, is 
approximately   354   days   long.      To   keep   it synchronised   with   the   solar 
calendar,  in  which  years  are  approximately  365  days  long,  adjustments are 
made to the lunar-based calendar every 2.5 years.  This is achieved by adding 
an additional month called an ‘adhik’ or ‘Purushottam’ month to the calendar. 
 
 In  Gujarãt,  the Kãrtiki Samvat is  used,  where the  new year begins  after  Divãli 
on Kãrtik sud 1.   The Ashãdhi Samvat still  prevails  in  some  parts  of Rãjasthãn 
and Gujarãt – in Kutch and Saurãshtra.  In this system, the new year begins on 
Ashãdh sud 1.  The Vachanãmrut is written using the Ashãdhi Samvat. 
 
 The  Common  Era  year  corresponding  to  the Samvat year  is  obtained  by 
subtracting  57  years  from  the  Vikram  year  if  the  date  falls  between Ãshãdh 
sud 1 and December 31
st
; and 56 years if the date falls between January 1
st
 and 
Jyeshtha vad 15. 

Appendix I – Months and Seasons 
 
- 908 - 
 
 
 
 
 
 
New Year’s Day of the Ashãdhi Samvat 
(Ashãdh sud 1) 
 
The Vachanãmrut is written using the 
Ashãdhi Samvat. 
Seasons 
Seasons 
New Year’s Day of the Kãrtiki Samvat 
(Kãrtik sud 1) 